
0:14-
hello and welcome to this course on English language communication . In this introductory lecture , we would be familiarising ourselves with some of the basic concepts of a language 
0:28-
and communication that wood frame our future discussions . But before we start discussing those basic things , I would like to begin by clarifying what this course is not 
0:44-
going to teach you because I think that will help you shape your expectations regarding this course better and would also hopefully provide you with a more enriching learning experience . 
0:58-
So the first thing that I want to clarify right away is that this course is not a language learning course . So if you don't know the B six 
1:11-
of English language , if you lack the rudimentary English workability , if you cannot construct simple sentences in English or if you find it difficult to understand the language 
1:25-
as I'm using it right now , then I freed that this particular course is not going to help you very much . However , having said that , I 
1:40-
would definitely encourage you to use the online language learning resources which are actually plentifully available , and most of them are even free . So I I would definitely 
1:54-
encourage you to use those a language learning resources and to start learning English from scratch . And I know that language learning can seem to be a very daunting 
2:9-
task at the beginning . But I can assure you that if you give this project sufficient time and sufficient amount of concentration , then at the end of the 
2:23-
day you will realise that it's not a major thing . People do pick up languages from scratch , right , so I am sure you will also be able 
2:33-
to do that with English . It's not a big deal now , coming to the other things that this course is not about . It is not a course 
2:45-
that will teach you how to write your C V or your job application or how to participate . Let's in a group discussion . In my previous experience of 
2:56-
teaching this course in an offline mode , I have often come across students who approach English communication from a rather narrowly utilitarian perspective . So they need to learn 
3:10-
English communication in order to improve their job applications or in order to right better statements of purpose , because they are going to apply to universities abroad for higher 
3:22-
education or because they want to improve their presentation skills , for instance , Now do . Oh , I understand that these are some of the most important ways 
3:34-
in which we use English communication in our life . Today , we simply cannot learn English communication only for these specific set off goals . The learning cannot be 
3:51-
so narrowly defined . So a more holistic approach is in fact required . If we want to familiarise ourselves with the nuances of English and to use it as 
4:4-
an efficient tool of communication , be it in looking for jobs or making better presentations in our colleges or offices or beat in writing novels or poems . So 
4:20-
our course is going to be located somewhere between being a language learning module that teachers English language from the B six and being a highly specialised course , teaching 
4:35-
you how to make use of English in a very specific and narrow set off contexts . What I intended to teach you in the scores is how to communicate 
4:49-
in English effectively . And , of course , the main stress here is on the word effectively because I already would presume , while teaching you this course that 
5:3-
you have at least a passing familiarity with English language , and so we will be covering some of the same grounds that you might have covered . While let's 
5:15-
say , in school , especially in our discussion of for some of the grammatical aspects of the language , we will not do so to learn English grammar for 
5:27-
the sake of it , we will rather learn those things in order to use them more carefully , so as to make ourselves more easily and more clearly understood . 
5:44-
In other words , we would learn how to use some of the things that we already know more effectively . So the am of this course , therefore , 
5:58-
is firstly to go beyond a road to learning of grammar and to use the underlying rules that structure the English language to engage in what I would call clatter 
6:12-
free exchanges of thoughts . Secondly , to have a more nuanced set off vocabulary at one's disposal , which allows for a more precise expression of ideas and emotions . 
6:29-
Thirdly , to use rules of grammar as an effective tool box , not only to write and speak correctly , but also to develop a style of ones , 
6:44-
fourthly , to be conscious of the commonly made grammar and punctuation mistakes that comprise the that compromise , the clarity of communication and finally to better structure our presentations , 
7:3-
both written and oral , in order to have the maximum impact on the audience or the reader . So in other words , all our lessons , including those 
7:17-
which revise some of the things that we might already be familiar wait will be geared towards learning how to make our communication more effective . But before we begin 
7:30-
discussing about the ways of effectively communicating in English , it is important to understand some basic tenets that frame human communication in general . So in this introductory lecture , 
7:46-
we will occupy ourselves with the all important question . What is communication ? And from there we will then move on to the issue of how human communication might 
7:59-
have originated . And what are some of the features that make human communication a unique device that allows us to be the kind of social animals that we are ? 
8:12-
So let us start with the question of what is communication or putting . His dictionary defines communication as a transmission or exchange of information , knowledge or ideas . 
8:31-
When we think of such transmission or exchange , we always or at least we usually think of individuals consciously and deliberately performing this act of translating information knowledge , 
8:47-
Ideas , etcetera . So a for instance , when I tell you it is very cold outside or write it down and send it to you in the form 
8:58-
of a letter or text it to you as a form of digital communication . I am intentionally sharing this piece of knowledge . But for a biologist , such 
9:12-
intentionality is not always an integral part of communication . And here I am talking about communication in general and not specifically about human communication . So let us imagine 
9:28-
a situation where un I are inside a house that has central heating and is therefore quite warm and cosy . Now , this would mean that neither of us 
9:46-
when inside the house , would have any idea about the kind of temperature that is outside . Now , let us imagine that I step out of the house 
9:56-
and you see me shivering from one of the windows . So a piece of information is already passed on to you without my intentionally communicating to you anything . 
10:13-
Just by seeing me shiver , you would know Forest is that it is very cold outside . And yet when I was shivering , I did not intend to 
10:24-
pass on this information consciously to you . such kind of non intentional communication . A ll display is rampant within the biological world where the individual and here I 
10:41-
am using the word individual in a very loose cells , which might mean a human being . An animal of fish or even a plant through such non intentional 
10:53-
communicative display , as I said , is rampant within the biological world , where the individual transmits pieces of information without even being conscious of it . Let's take 
11:5-
the example of the tail feathers of an Indian peacock , for instance . Now it is wonderfully colourful and extravagant , and it's display communicates to the P N 
11:22-
or the female of the species , a sense of attractiveness which influences her choice of meats . So , in other words , the more colourful and extravagant the 
11:36-
tail feathers are of a particular peacock , the more it appears to be attractive to a P . Yet this communication of attractiveness is not a conscious translation , 
11:53-
a conscious act of communication . The kind of tail feathers a peacock has is determined genetically , and the very fact that peacocks would have such extravagant and colourful 
12:8-
tail feathers , which will be interpreted by P hence in terms of sexual attractiveness , is something that is determined through evolution . So when we talk about communication , 
12:23-
we therefore need to begin by making a distinction between what the psychologist and linguist Michael Thomas L . O calls communicative display and communicative signals . So Thomas Alot 
12:41-
defines communicative display as and I quote proto typically physical characteristics that in some way affect the behaviour of others , such as large horns , which debtor , competitive 
12:59-
or bright colours which attract meets under such communicative displaced where information is transmitted without voluntary control of the individual during the transmission , Thomas A law also slots what 
13:16-
he refers to as reflexive behaviours , which are to use the words of Thomas alot , invariably evoked by particular stimuli or emotional states , and over which the 
13:31-
individual has no voluntary control . An example of such reflexive behaviour is my shivering in cold after stepping outside the warm house . If you remember , it conveyed 
13:47-
to you looking at me from a window , a very specific information about the temperature outside . But my shivering was a communicative display over which I did not 
14:2-
have any voluntary control , which means to repeat I was not sending out any message to you consciously . Now let us come to communicative signals in Thomas Aloes 
14:20-
Words , Communicative Signals and I quote , are chosen and produced by individual organisms flexibly and the strategically for particular social goals adjusted in various ways for particular circumstances . 
14:41-
Here , two things are important to note , which in fact distinguishes communicative signals from communicative displace . The first thing is a notion of intentionality . Communicative signals , 
15:0-
unlike communicative , this place are generated with an intention , and they can be strategically manipulated by the individuals who has to convene certain specific times of information or 
15:15-
idea or knowledge . This introduces an ethical angle to the use of communicative signals because the generation of communicative signals are largely in our control and we can strategically 
15:33-
manipulate them . One key to effective communication is to remain ethical about these strategic reputations . This is because sending out informations or disseminating knowledge or spreading any particular 
15:50-
kind of emotional content has any of these things . They have their own inevitable repercussions . When these transmissions happened through communicative display , one doesn't have control over 
16:4-
them and can have little hold over repercussions that ensue . However , since communicative signals are intentionally generated , we need to be more careful about the possible repercussions 
16:18-
that they might have . We also need to be more ethically conscious in this case because the generation of communicative signals always happened within a social context . Now 
16:31-
what do I mean by that ? So , in contrast , let's say communicative displays are involuntary expressions which happened irrespective of whether , for instance , I am 
16:46-
within a social context or not . Irrespective of weather , for instance , someone is there to interpret the displaced and understand stand them as communicative messages . In 
17:0-
other words , I would shiver in the cold , irrespective of whether you are looking at me from a window or not . However , as Thomas Alot points 
17:11-
out , communicative signals are only generated to achieve particular social goals . In other words , if I feel the cold outside and return to tell you that it 
17:27-
is very cold , then I generate that piece of communicative signal to give you an information that serves a very specific social purpose . And what is that social 
17:40-
purpose ? Well , that message would caution you about venturing outside without proper warm clothing . Sze so at the basis of what Thomas Alot describes as communicative signals , 
17:56-
is a desire for social cooperation . I communicate with you through intentionally transmitting certain pieces of information or knowledge and in return , I expect that you would also 
18:10-
help me , similarly through your communicative signals in the Thomas . Alot describes this cooperative aspect as the key feature of human communication and suggests that communicated signals form 
18:25-
part of an entire network of cooperation that makes humans who they are within the animal kingdom . And since Thomas L . A is making a very powerful argument 
18:38-
here , let me read out in Toto the relevant section to you from his text titled Origins of Human Communication . It turns out that human cooperation is unique 
18:52-
in the animal kingdom in many ways both structurally and motivational . E specifically , human cooperation is structured by what some modern philosophers of action called shared intentionality or 
19:11-
we intentionality in general . Shared intentionality is what is necessary for engaging in uniquely human forms of collaborative activity , in which a plural subject we is involved joint 
19:29-
goals , joint intentions , mutual knowledge , shared beliefs , all in the context of various cooperative motives . Human cooperative communication is one instance Al made a special 
19:45-
instance of uniquely human cooperative activity , relying on shared intentionality , human communication or , more specifically , human communicative signalling is therefore at the most fundamental level , 
20:5-
a cooperative activities , our desire to help others and in turn , be helped by them . Communication can therefore never be a purely egocentric activity because it is 
20:20-
fundamentally directed at the plural subject week and its efforts to achieve joint goals . Thus , remembering this ethical baseline of social cooperation , I think is very important 
20:38-
if you want to learn anything about effective communication , because at the end of the day , our communication is truly effective only when it performs the ethical task 
20:49-
of strengthening the cooperative social network within which we are situated . Now , though , we have shown how communication can happen both through communicative displays and communicative signals . 
21:7-
In this course , we will only focus on the later here again . We need to note that communicative signals can be of different types . Gestures , for 
21:22-
instance , can be a very powerful communicator . Singles imagine you are standing in a narrow passageway with one of your friends , and she points her index finger 
21:34-
to the space behind you . Now that pointing is a communicative signal , which would make you turn your head around and probably find that someone is approaching you 
21:49-
from down the passageway . And as a response you might move away to the side to make we for that person so that person can pass . So as 
22:3-
you can see , this gesture is a true act of communicative signalling , which is both intentional and which aims at social cooperation . But the most significant form 
22:17-
of human communication is , of course , what we call human language . And when we discuss effective communication in this course , we will be discussing how to 
22:29-
use language or more specifically , one language , which is English . But then what is a language here again , we turned to the accident . This dictionary , 
22:44-
which defines language as and I quote the system of spoken or written communication used by a particular country , people , community , etcetera , typically consisting of words 
22:57-
used within a regular grammatical and sell tactic structure against Putin's are important to note here . First , the fact that there are a variety of languages that is 
23:12-
to say , different people , different communities , different countries . They use different languages , and in fact , there are more than 6000 recorded varieties of human 
23:25-
language , of which English is one prominent language . But as we shall see , in spite of this enormous variety , humans might have a common faculty of 
23:38-
language or a generalised language sense , which enables us to use words with a regular grammatical and some tactical structure . We will talk about this universal faculty of 
23:51-
language shared by humans in a moment . But for now , let us return to the definition of language that I quoted from Oxford English Dictionary . That definition 
24:3-
also suggested that language is a system of communication that uses spoken or written words . Now , technically , we can expand the meaning of the term language even 
24:17-
further . And let's say we can incorporate gestures into it . And in this extended sense , we speak of things like the sign language . For instance , 
24:30-
between office see being used by people with hearing impairment . There can be other sorts of language as well , where you have numbers and symbols instead of words 
24:42-
and here and thinking of programming languages like C Plus trust , for instance , a java or titan . But for the purpose of this course , we would 
24:52-
understand the term language in its narrow sense as a means of communication through the use of words within regular grammatical and sent tactical structure . Now do . In 
25:5-
this course , we will primarily focus on how to increase the effectiveness of our use of written language . We need to acknowledge they're a language at the point 
25:15-
of its origin , is a verbal T and indeed has some degree of affinity with the vocal sounds used by various mammals and birds to communicate between themselves . 
25:31-
So let us focus for a while on the origins of human language and its connexion with the communicative use of vocal sounds in Animal World , which would also 
25:44-
clarify something about the general faculty of language or the language sense that I was talking about as a li persons . We see forms of vocalised communication all around 
25:58-
us . In the animal world , we hear birds chirping , dogs , barking , crickets , tree dilating , even a critic . Animals like wheels produced fairly 
26:8-
elaborate forms of vocalised communications , which are referred to interestingly as songs . So you have reels singing . The question is , how do we place our spoke 
26:24-
and communication that is human language . Within this larger picture of communication through sounds is human language , a continuation of these various forms of vocalisation that are already 
26:37-
available within the animal kingdom and are used by animals who predate humans in terms of evolution , Air is human language a very unique thing , which has a 
26:52-
very little connexion with the other forms of vocalised communication that we witness in the animal world . These questions , which are ultimately tied up with defining the origins 
27:4-
and the basic nature of human language , have been answered variously bye in different linguists . In this lecture , I would be looking at these questions from a 
27:21-
point of view that is associated with the celebrated linguist Noam Chomsky . Now it is important to note that though the trump skin view about the origins and the 
27:35-
basic nature of human language is today one of the dominant views , at least within the field of linguistics , it is by no means the only view . 
27:46-
In fact , this is a very hotly debated topic , and scholars are yet to arrive at a consensus view . That's , for instance , Michael Thomas , 
27:54-
L . O . The linguist that I referred to earlier . His views about the origin and the nature of human language is very different from the views held 
28:3-
by Chomsky . And though I would not be able to deal with Thomas Aloes arguments in the limited duration of this lecture , I would definitely encourage you to 
28:16-
look at some of his books , like Constructing a Language or Origins of Human Communication , to which I referred to earlier , If you feel interested to know 
28:25-
more about his position on this particular issue now coming back to the trump skin view . So in 2002 Chomsky with a two other Howard University academicians , MD 
28:43-
Hauser and Beauty Fitch Route a seminal people Thai teen , The Faculty of Language . What is it Who has it and how did it evolve in this paper ? 
28:59-
Chomsky and his colleagues argued that the ability to produce human language is constituted of three different components , which come together to form what they refer to as the 
29:12-
faculty of language in the broad cells , or F L B ensured the first two components of F . L B R , described by them as sensory motor 
29:26-
system and conceptual Intentional system . But it is a third component , which , according to them , is the most unique one . This component is referred to 
29:40-
in the people as s in or faculty of language in the narrow sense . Now , please do not get confused here . F l b and F l 
29:55-
are not too different faculties of language that a human being possesses rather f l n is a constituent part of F L B . That needs to be very 
30:8-
clear in your mind . Now , I will later come to a detailed the discussion of this S Ellen , which , as I mentioned , is the most 
30:18-
unique part of F l B . But before I do that , I you will need to clarify the meaning of the two other components . So the first 
30:27-
component in which is the sensory motor system what is it ? It is basically all the physiological and neurological components of our body that aids in the articulation and 
30:42-
perception of speak sounds . And this would include things like our vocal tracks are auditory system and think like that . The component called conceptual intentional system , on 
30:59-
the other hand , deals with our ability to form ideas or conceptualise certain information or theorise certain kinds of knowledge . You know , we know what the first 
31:18-
two components of f l b r but then let us come to f l . What is F Ellen ? Well , to use the language of the people 
31:29-
that we are referring to here , F l n is a computational system that generates internal representations and maps them into the sensory motor interface by the phone , 
31:42-
a logical system and into the conceptual intentional interface by the semantic system . Okay , what does this mean ? Well , let us first try and divide this 
31:56-
definition into smaller sections , which we can then focus on separately to arrive , or a more comprehensive understanding of what is being said here . The most important 
32:7-
argument in this definition that I just quoted is , of course , the fact that F L n is a computational system and we will discuss what the authors 
32:20-
mean by F Ellen being a computational system . What kind of competition ? It does its secrets . But Levis first focus on another important section of this definition . 
32:33-
So these authors are saying that if Ellen , which is the computational system , has an interface with the two other components of the F B , the sensory 
32:47-
motor and the conceptual intentions , in other words , connects the other two components to produce what we recognise as human language . So what are these two pools 
33:3-
that the F L is actually connecting the first ? Is the phone a logical system or the system of speech sounds that are associated with the sensory motor component , 
33:17-
and the second is a semantic system or the system of meaning making associated with the conceptual intentional component , according to Chomsky Hauser . And fetch this ability of 
33:30-
the F . L N to connect the sensory motor with the conceptual . Intentional is what makes it crucial element that underlines the faculty , which allows us to 
33:43-
produce what is recognised as human language . So the definition of F L N is then that it is a computational system which connects the meaning making process of 
33:55-
the mind with our physiological ability to produce and recognise speech zones . Now in the paper , Chomsky and others argue that out of the three components that constitute , 
34:13-
F . L B can be traced back to other species within the animal world . What are these two things ? Well , they are the sensory motor component 
34:26-
and the conceptual intentional company . And their paper claims that a significant amount of research into the perception , as well as production of speech sounds among animals , 
34:38-
have shown that the sensory motor aspect of the F L Bob is not unique to humans . That's , for instance , many species do shoe are remarkable ability 
34:50-
to distinguish between human speech sounds or four names and are even able to distinguish between sentences spoken and two different languages based on their rhythmic peculiarities . This proves 
35:6-
that our ability to distinguish and understand the speed sounds is commonly shared with a number of other species in the animal world . Similarly , in terms of sound 
35:20-
production , we find that we share treats with the non human world , as many of us might have observed . Birds and non human primates like chimpanzees , 
35:33-
gorillas , orang utan all have functional vocal tracks that are used for producing communicative sounds , which are recognised as such , which are recognised as communication sounds by 
35:48-
at least the members of their own species . Very good example of this is the alarm call off the where at monkeys now very it's are monkeys native to 
36:4-
the eastern and southern part of sub Sahara Africa , and they have developed a very remarkable , an elaborate system of alarm calls that caution the community against specific 
36:19-
predators like eagles , leopards , sleek . So what is interesting is that the profile of Vocalisation , that is to say , the profile of the sound of 
36:32-
a variant monkeys alarm call changes according to the predator sewed alarm call for a leopard that is generated by a very IT monkey would be very different from the 
36:50-
sound from the alarm call that that monkey generates when it sees , let's say , a hawk or a steak and the other various monkeys in the vicinity . 
37:5-
They would recognise this difference in the sound profile of the alarm calls , and they would act accordingly , depending on which predator is being indicated . Through that 
37:21-
alarm call the people on the Faculty of Language also goes on to suggest that even the conceptual intentional system of the F L B , just like the sensory 
37:32-
motor system , is shared between humans and various other nonhuman species . The paper , Our News at various animals , poses an impressive variety of abstract concepts , 
37:49-
which include information about how to use tools , how to recognise and distinguish between geometric relationships , between kinship status , how to recognise food , how to recognise 
38:0-
numbers , etc . But the people then goes on to say something very interesting , which I would like to court directly from that text . Surprisingly , however , 
38:11-
there is a mismatch between the conceptual capacities of animals and the communicative content of their focal and visual signals . In other words , the conceptual intentional system and 
38:28-
the sensory motor system , both present in various animal species other than humans , are not mapped on to each other very well . Heupel language faculty is remarkable 
38:44-
primarily because it allows this mapping to happen effectively and the reason we can coordinate our conceptual , intentional and our sensory motor systems . So effectively is the computational 
39:2-
system that Chomsky and his colleagues referred to as F l n . So as you can see here the answer to how human language might have originated or how 
39:17-
did it evolve within the larger context of vocalise ? Communication in the animal world is not a very simple one . The faculty of Human Language , in its 
39:27-
broad sense , has components that we clearly share with other species in the animal world and shows how our language ability is connected with the calls of various other 
39:42-
animals . It traces a very clear line of evolution , but at the same time , human language is special because of the computational system or the F l 
39:55-
that it incorporates , which is , according to chop scan his colleagues unique in the animal world . But here again , we need to be careful . Whenever 
40:6-
we see something is unique to us humans because ecology or the study of animal behaviour is still a rapidly evolving field . And in the light of new information 
40:19-
it might bring to us in the future years , we might have to revisit such claims of uniqueness . But leaving this debate about uniqueness aside , the more 
40:34-
fundamental question here is What is it that the computes ? What is We return back to that question so well , as mentioned before , F . Ellen is 
40:53-
primarily a computational system which act the minimum . It might have different aspects , but the paper claims that at the very minimum , F . Ellen has the 
41:9-
capacity of Riker , Shin Riker Shin is at the basis of what the f l end computes or how the F Ellen computes . Right ? So what is 
41:25-
Ricker Shin ? Simply put the word Riker . Sh in is associated with the root word wrecker . And this root word record basically means to repeat Riker . 
41:41-
Shin happens when you embed or enfold something within something else which has the same nature . And this is what results in the recurrence or the repetitions . Now 
41:59-
all of this might sound slightly confusing , but it is very easily explained by we of an example . Take a sentence like this . Rahul knows it now . 
42:14-
What is Rahul ? No , To answer this , we can have another sentence . Meena is happy now . Notice that we can in fold or embed this 
42:29-
second sentence within the first one . Sabi get something like Rahul knows that Meena is happy . So here we have an example of Riker Shin , where a 
42:45-
sentence is embedded within another sentence . And we can go on with this Ryker Shin by embedding more and more sentences within the parents structure so that we have 
42:57-
something like those Russian toys where there is a doll which is contained within another doll which is contained within another doll which is contained within another doll and so 
43:9-
on and so forth . Thus , by applying this principle of Riker Shen , we can have sentences like long sentences . Like Rahul knows that Meena thinks that 
43:23-
Sushil regrets that Wasim was not included in the team . Now , do I have used a sentence within a sentence within a sentence ? As an example of 
43:35-
Riker Shen , we can also have examples where smaller constituent parts are embedded , one within the other . For instance , we can have Riker Shins of now 
43:46-
freezes . Take this example . For instance , the apples in the fridge . Right now this is a noun freeze . But if you look carefully , you 
43:59-
will find another noun phrase already embedded within it , which is the fridge Now , just like our previous example of Riker Shen . We can go on stretching 
44:13-
this example in finite so we can see things like the apples in the fridge in the room in the house . Right . So this whole thing is a 
44:27-
noun Freeze . When you look carefully , there is another noun freeze with appearing freeze that has another noun freeze that has another non freeze . And just like 
44:42-
that Russian doll structure , these reclusive patterns which we can generate because of F l N forms there for the fundamental essence of any human language and allows us 
44:55-
we're importantly and in finite amount of information or data to be coded within a sentence , that is to say , because of this property of Riker Shen , 
45:9-
we can actually carry on with our sentences in finite and do we might have to stop because we have limited memory power or because the capacity of our lungs 
45:20-
are limited . The system of Riker sh in the computational system of F . L N does not put any such restrictions . So if we are only guided 
45:35-
by the computational system and we are not bound by such other restrictions like memory , for instance , or breath , we can actually go on and go on 
45:46-
and go on . Go on . And it is his capacity to express an in finite series of information that makes human language such an effective tool of communication . 
46:0-
Unlike , say , the language of our closest nonhuman relatives within the animal world , whose sensory motor system can only very coarsely articulate the rich of variety of 
46:12-
ideas that they're conceptual , intentional system might be able to generate moving beyond the Hauser , Chomsky and Fitch Paper , I would like to point out some more 
46:26-
interesting features that make human language very special and effective kind of communicative signalling system . And again , I would hesitate to call any of these features absolutely unique 
46:41-
to human language given , as I say , the limited amount of knowledge that we have about animal behaviour . But from what we know till now , none 
46:53-
of these features have a lot of parallels in the animal world in the kind of communications that the use most of these features that I am going to discuss 
47:7-
here . In fact , all of them are products of the study of an American linguist called Charles Francis Hockett , who identified around 13 crucial elements . That 
47:23-
number kept changing throughout his scarier so more or less 13 crucial elements that he said underlined the basic design of human language in its spoken form . And he 
47:37-
referred to them as design features of human language . The first such special feature that I would want to draw your attention to is what is referred to as 
47:52-
double articulation or duality of patterning or simply as duality . What does this mean ? It means the abilities to use various combinations of a limited number of meaningless 
48:8-
elements to produce a large number of meaningful elements . Now , how does this principle operate within human language ? Will ? Let's try and think How many words 
48:24-
do we know in any language that we are thoroughly familiar with ? Let's say English . How many words of English language do you know ? Probably the answer 
48:36-
would be in thousands , right ? But if I ask you how many distinct speech sounds or four names of English language can articulate or distinguish between , then 
48:53-
the answer to that will be very different . In fact , it would not be more than 100 even if you are an expert in phonetics whose life work 
49:6-
has been to identify and distinguish speech sounds . Right now , this very fact that we can combine such a limited number of meaningless speech sounds to produce such 
49:19-
a wide area of meaningful words represents the duality of English language , and the same would hold true for any human language . Let me explain this with an 
49:34-
example . Take , for instance , the word cap . It consists of 34 names or three distinct speech sounds , right ? It is consisted of the curse 
49:50-
sound , the A sound and the purse ound . So if we inscribed the word finan tickle Lee , then it would look something like this . And as 
50:3-
you can see here that often , Etting inscription looks different from how we usually write . These words , because of fanatic inscription , is purely guided by the 
50:12-
speed sounds and nothing else anyway . So the sound car , or or in themselves , they do not mean anything right . However they can mean , and 
50:28-
they do mean something when they are combined together to form specific words . And just like in a game of Scrabble , where you can organise various individual meaningless 
50:39-
letters to produce different combinations of meaningful words . Here , too , you can combine limited numbers of meaningless four names in different combinations to create different , meaningful 
50:50-
words . So , for instance , we can use the same set of four knees and rearranged them , and we will have a completely different word with a 
51:2-
different meaning . So rather than starting with if we reverse it , if we reverse the entire order , if we start with and then put there and then 
51:18-
put car , then the same set of four names used in the word cap will now give us the very different word back . We can even add an 
51:34-
extra four name here , and that will also give us a new word . So , for instance , if we had the four name door at the end 
51:41-
of the word back , we get the word pact , which is a different word from the word back . If we replace a phoning , for instance , 
51:53-
let's say if he replace the phoney per with the four name tour , then the world changes from cap to cat and this again we can rearrange this last 
52:4-
word . We can re Aries the four names and we will get another new word act to which we can add the phone imp er at the beginning and 
52:17-
we will get another new word packed . And if , instead of per we repeat the phoney tour at the beginning , we would get another new word attack . 
52:31-
So you see , already we have created a fair number of meaningful words by combining a limited number of meaningless four names . And if you think of a 
52:43-
set of around 44 names per language and each language will have a different set of four names , this is because the human ability to produce speech sounds might 
52:58-
be more than 50 and they are usually more than 50 . But whether within a language to different speed sounds would be registered as meaningful e different . That 
53:15-
is a very crucial question , and I would briefly like to comment on this . For instance , take the two very indifferent speech sounds and now in languages 
53:28-
like Bangla , for essence or in a language like Hindi , for instance , occur and her are two different four names that is , there difference is recognised 
53:42-
as meaningful right . Forrester's the Hindi word or the Bangla . Word got is very different from the Bangla word cat in meaning , right ? But in English , 
54:1-
though , I can very well imagine an individual being able to produce these two different speed sounds . The language itself does not recognised this difference as meaningful difference . 
54:18-
So in hell ish , they would not be considered as two distinct four names , right anyway , coming back to our earlier discussion in a language of , 
54:30-
say , around 44 names and different languages have different number of four names . So 44 names at an average . Let's sit . Even with that small a 
54:44-
number of four names , we can produce so many words we can combine them , and the amount of meaningful words that we can produce out of just 44 
54:56-
innings is enormous . And this capacity of duality is not observed in the communication of any other animals that we know about or we have studied another special feature . 
55:14-
Underlying human language is what is called displacement . This refers to our ability to talk about things and events that are not happening in the present time or the 
55:28-
present space within which we are located . For instance , you can very well imagine yourself having a conversation with a friend about a wedding party that you might 
55:40-
have attended a week back . And you can discuss about how good the food was there and how wonderful the decoration was , how beautifully the bride and the 
55:51-
groom were attired . None of these things are present in the here and now , within which the conversation is happening between you and your friend . And yet 
56:6-
you do not find it unusual or difficult to discuss these things , which are not . They're in the present time and in the present space within which the 
56:17-
two of you are located , right ? Similarly , it is perfectly plausible to imagine you discussing future events with your friends , which are again not part of 
56:29-
the here and now . You might , for instance , discuss travel plans you might discuss . The kind , of course is that you are going to take 
56:37-
up after graduation and such ability to communicate about things which are not part of the here and now are against unique to human communications . I I will mention 
56:51-
litre one , a very interesting exception within the animal world , but Before we discuss that exception , let me tell you of another special feature of human language , 
57:3-
which is productivity . So this ability to discuss things or narrate things which are not present in the here and now that is the design feature called displacement . 
57:17-
Now we move on to the third design feature , which I will be referring to after Hockett as productivity now , productivity czar , ability to use language , 
57:29-
too . Say anything that we desire , including things that we might never have seed or heard before . For instance , I can see something to you like 
57:42-
I have never danced with a 6 ft tall chimpanzee in a nightclub of Port Moresby . Now I can assure you that this is the sentence that have never 
57:54-
cede before , not only because I have actually never done the thing that is mentioned in the sentence , but also because I never knew before preparing for this 
58:7-
lecture that there exists a place called Port Morris be I found about that plays very recently when I was trying to search the Internet to know what is the 
58:18-
capital city of the island nation Papua New Guinea . So now you know that Port Moresby is a capital of Papua New Guinea . But I'm also pretty sure 
58:29-
that you have . You had not heard this sentence before . I uttered it a minute back . And yet , thanks to the productivity of human language , 
58:42-
I could speak those words . And Hugh could perfectly comprehend them without none of us having ever heard that or ever spoken that before . Now , the reason 
58:56-
why I have desist ID from claiming these features to be unique to humans is because every once in a while we encounter rare exceptions within the animal world , 
59:11-
where we see one or the other of these design features . And I just mentioned being present as part of the communication of some species . One such rare 
59:22-
exception , for instance , is provided by the waggle dance that honey bees use to communicate sources of honey to other members of their highs . Thus , when 
59:34-
a honeybee scout fines a source of funny , what it does is it returns to its highs , and it passes on that information to other members within the 
59:48-
hive . And it informs them about things like how far the source of honey is from the hive , the direction they would need to fly to arrive at 
60:0-
the source of honey and even how much honey one can find in that source . It does all of this by performing very elaborate waggling dance , which traces 
60:12-
out a figure that resembles something like the number eight . So , for instance , the more excited the bees dance is , the more honey is indicated in 
60:26-
the source , also the angle in which the be traces out . The figure of eight indicates the angle relative to the sun in the sky , in which 
60:35-
the bees would need to fly in order to arrive at that specific source of honey . Now , as you can see , this single in dance makes reference 
60:48-
to things which are not present in the here and now , within which the communication is happening within which that dance is happening . Because the honeybee scout has 
61:1-
already returned back to the hive and is nowhere near that source of honey , so there is no gesturing or indicating towards that in any simple week . It 
61:16-
therefore provides us with a similar example of displacement that we encountered while discussing the scenario where you and your friends were discussing about a wedding that you had attended 
61:29-
a week back . But fascinating as such instances of parallels between human and nonhuman communication might be , there is no denying the fact that human communication as a 
61:42-
whole is wonderfully unique , and it is unmatched in its sophistication in its ability to transmit information , knowledge , ideas and emotions . In this lecture , I 
62:0-
tried providing you with a snapshot of some of the basic features that make the language that you kn I speak so very special . From the next lecture onwards , 
62:13-
we will try to see how we can make even more effective our use of this wonderful communication tool that each of us possess . Thank you . 