
0:14-
near friends . Welcome back to this lecture series on English language communication . As you'll remember in a previous lecture , we had familiarised ourselves with few definitions , 
0:28-
as well as made a few distinctions , which would allow us to speak about effective communication in a more informed week , we started by pointing out that communication , 
0:40-
which is basically a transmission of ideas , information and knowledge , can happen both voluntarily as well as involuntary . In the second case , that is , in 
0:54-
the case of involuntary transmission , transmission happens through what we call communicative displaced , and in the first case that is in the case of voluntary communication , transmission 
1:8-
happens through communicative signalling language in the narrow sense of being a system of spoken or written words underlined by a grammatical and sin . Tactical structure is a form 
1:22-
of communicative signalling , and as we saw , we humans have a unique capacity to produce language , very complex language . This is because we possess abilities to 
1:38-
form conceptual ideas , which we can effectively articulate and apprehend through organs like our voice box and art auditory mechanism , and this weekend do thanks to the unique 
1:56-
computational system that we have in our mind , and it is this unique computational system that linguists like Chomsky Forrester's refers to as the faculty of language narrow for 
2:13-
in short , however , today we will see that apart from these innate faculties which allow us to produce and comprehend rather elaborate language , there are certain external 
2:30-
technological innovations to which have a profound impact on how we communicate and how we use our language . Let me give you an example here . When I was 
2:45-
young , mobile telephones have just started becoming a part of our lives , and I remember how sending and receiving SMS is became a new mood of communicating . 
3:1-
This short messaging service required us to transform the traditional res in which we spelt are words or use punctuation sze n radically new forms actually , and I still 
3:16-
recall how some of our elders were deeply concerned about how it made us flout the rules of conventional grammar and photography . So they feared that that this views 
3:30-
of SMS would permanently corrupt our language use . Yet SMS was not the first technological innovation that changed the way in which we use language . In fact , 
3:47-
such changes in language has accompanied all major changes in the medium of communication that has happened during the course of human history . Let us take the example of 
4:3-
telegraphy , which in the 19th century was as major a technological innovation in the field of communication , as mobile phone has been in RD and each I don't 
4:17-
know how many of you are familiar with this thing called the Telegraph . I don't know how many of you have personally received any telegraphic message , probably not 
4:29-
many , but even 50 years back . It was a pretty common thing in India . People would communicate the most important of news , like the birth of 
4:41-
a child or the demise of a family member to the distant relatives and friends through telegrams which were more efficiently of conveying messages over a long distance . Of 
5:0-
course , more elaborate letters would follow those telegrams , but the telegrams were the first message that were sent out to people living and a long distance in the 
5:15-
days when telephone was still not widely used . These telegrams were in fact not only the most efficient but also the fastest way of sending messages out . This 
5:30-
particular mode of communication reduced the message into a coded form of dots and dashes known as the Morse code and transmitted it through electrical wires . Now transmitting messages 
5:44-
over long distance by quoting them in the form of signals has been actually a very long practise . Thus , in earlier times we would use beacon signals . 
5:56-
For instance , were lighted beacons were used to convey simple messages over a long distance . In certain places of Africa , for instance , drum sounds were used 
6:9-
in a highly effective manner to communicate long distance messages . But what we understand as modern electric based telegraphy only developed in the second quarter of the 19th century . 
6:25-
It was first put to use in England in 18 37 but its potential IT ease were truly developed in America Were a person called Samuel Morse simplified the technical 
6:37-
process involved and also invented the code , which soon became the international standard in sending out telegrams in India . Elected Telegraph came in eating 60 when communication wires 
6:56-
well lead between a place called ally poor in Kolkata and a port town called Diamond Harbour , around 40 kilometres away . The degree of importance that the colonial 
7:8-
masters of India associated with this new medium of communication can be easily judged by a letter that didn't Governor General Lord Daloa Z route to the court of directors 
7:20-
of the East India Company and a quote from that letter not withstanding the continued pressure of finance . I regard this matter of electric telegraphs as of such in 
7:34-
finite moment in India that I recommend the sanction of government to whatever . Some may be necessary for conducting the experiments on a scale sufficiently large to enable those 
7:48-
charged with it to carry on their labours with rapidity and the fullest efficiency . The reason why so much importance was ascribed to electrical telegraphy was because for the 
8:4-
first time in human history , it really made communication independent of locomotion . One . Do I mean by Yes , let us try to think of the ways 
8:15-
in which we can send a message from one place to another . Now its crudest form . We can increase the special range of our communications simply by raising 
8:25-
our voice . If you are situated on the opposite end of a big crowded room , for instance , I can probably convey a message to you by shouting 
8:37-
it allowed right ? But this does not take us very far , because if we are further away , let's say if you are situated in another city . 
8:51-
Shouting won't help me very much right now . 200 years back , I could have communicated to you situated in a different city by writing a letter to you . 
9:4-
And this letter would then be conveyed to you in whatever mode of intercity transport that was then available , which was probably a horse drawn carriage or something like 
9:15-
that . And then when the technology improved our mode of locomotion , when we got railways , for instance , letters started being delivered faster . Because now , 
9:32-
of course , my message could reach you at the speed in which the railways travelled . So it was a definite improvement from my letters reaching to you in 
9:44-
horse carriages . Or if I was writing to you from a very great distance , it would travel at the speed of a steamship , for instance . That's 
9:54-
200 years back . If you were situated in London and I were to write to you a letter from Calcutta , it would take a minimum of six months 
10:5-
to reach on ship Things , however , improved when the Suez Canal was opened up , but even then it would take not less than a few weeks before 
10:20-
you could read my letter the speed of transport has indeed increased immensely since those days , and today a deli to London flight takes less than nine hours . 
10:34-
But how long does it take to convey a message for the same amount of space over the same amount of space ? In the form of , let's say , 
10:43-
an email or a phone call ? It takes only a minuscule fraction of the time taken by the fastest of aero planes to travel the distance . This is 
10:57-
because the speed of locomotion today and the speed in which communication can travel they are no longer the same . They are no longer connected , and this disc 
11:13-
elect first happened in a significant way with the invention of electric telegraphy in the 19th century . So just like today , when a phone call or an email 
11:28-
is able to reach much faster than the fastest of the aircraft back then , telegraphic message could could reach your long distance friends or your long distance relative much 
11:42-
faster than a steam propelled train or ship . But for the purpose of this course , what is more important to note is how this revolution in the medium 
11:54-
of communication affected the way we use language In order to understand this , we will first need to understand the economics of telegraphy . Now , unlike a tree 
12:9-
in or a shape , which can carry a huge number of letters together , a single telegraph line can transmit one message at a time . This means that 
12:21-
when you are sending a letter by , let's say , a ship or an aeroplane be by weight . In other words , the more heavy your letter is , 
12:34-
the more up . If it is just a one page missive , then the money required to send it would be less . But if it's a multi page 
12:43-
outpouring of your heart and soul to your friend , then of course it will be more , and it will cost you more . I remember how , in 
12:52-
the good old days of letter writing , people would try their best to reduce the size of their hand writing and fit as many words in a page or 
13:1-
a postal card as possible , because a meal concerned there was to reduce the number of pages rather than restricting the number of words . In contrast , in 
13:12-
the case of a telegram , for instance , the economics revolved around time rather than wheat . How many words and letters were there in your message , determined 
13:25-
the amount of time required code it and to transmit it . And this intern determined the cost that you had to bear in order to send that message . 
13:40-
This peculiar economics of telegraphy as a medium of communication resulted in people trying to reduce their sentences as much as possible and using rather short words or even shortening 
13:54-
long words wherever possible . As David Ha Felder in his study titled The Telegraph in America Notes and I Court from the beginning of commercial telegraphy , operators dropped 
14:8-
words of low information content and abbreviated long words . A few days after the first Washington to Baltimore Telegraph line open for business in May 18 40 for Samuel 
14:22-
Morse at Washington directed his colleague Alfred Veil at Baltimore To condense your language more leave out whenever you can and to send only the beginning of a long common 
14:39-
words . This extreme condensation of sentences that telegraphy introduced in mid 19th century had a profound impact on the way American literature was written . This becomes evident if 
14:55-
we turn to the writings of one of the foremost American novel lists of the early 20th century . Ernest Hemingway two of Hemingway's colleagues who worked with him for 
15:7-
the newspaper Toronto Star remembered how excited he wars about the new writing style that telegraphy had brought about . They recalled how Hemingway came in one night and said , 
15:20-
Look at this cable . No fact . Noah directives know adverbs nothing but blood and bones and muscles . It's great . It's a new language . Hemingway , 
15:33-
while producing his novels and short storeys , tried shaping his prose after this telegraphic style and align it with what he identified as the new language and which he 
15:47-
thought was more suitable for his contemporary period . Let us look at an example of him anyways pros here , because that will give us a more concrete idea 
16:0-
about what we are talking in terms of a new language and a new style . So this is the opening paragraph from Hemingway's famous short Storey , a clean , 
16:10-
well lighted place . It was very late , and everyone had left the cafe except an old man who sat in a shadow . The leaves of the three 
16:22-
made against the electric light . In the day time , the street was dusty , but at night the do settled the dust , and the old man liked 
16:33-
to sit lied because he was deaf . And now at night it was quiet and he felt the difference . The two waiters inside the cafe New that the 
16:44-
old man was a little drunk , and while he was a good client , they knew that if he became too drunk , he would leave without paying , 
16:54-
so they kept watch on him . Even a casual reading of this passage should convince you that the language being used here is stripped to the level of bare 
17:6-
minimum with no added frills . The first thing that comes to our notice here is probably the vocabulary used by Hemingway . The set of words he employs in 
17:18-
this passage are all very simple , everyday words . Even a child in mid school who has only been probably learning English for a few years would have no 
17:29-
problem in understanding this passage , or at least the world's employed in this passage . And this lack of long and difficult sounding exotic words give this passage a 
17:42-
wonderful degree of lucidity and lightness , which is in fact , the hallmark of Hemingway's pros . The next thing that we notice is how the passage is almost 
17:54-
completely built with now nd's and worlds , objectives and adverbs are almost absolutely absent . As we will see in our later lectures . Now , NZ and words 
18:7-
are the most fundamental building blocks of a language and adverts and objectives are in fact offing , introduced as added decorations to create a more flour style . Thus , 
18:24-
many of us try and affect a more pumper style by rewriting . Bland . Free is like there is an old man by reciting it as there is an 
18:36-
old doddering man , right ? Or we tend to spikes up simple sentences like he was running across the street by adding adverbs like hastily or purposefully after the 
18:48-
verb . But in the telegraph inspired style of Hemingway , we file the author doing away with all such flab and giving the reader a new language , which 
19:0-
he describes as nothing but blood and bones and muscles . The third thing to notice about the telegraphic style of Hemingway is the brevity of his sentences . Now , 
19:14-
looking at the paragraph that have just quoted you might say that none of the sentences are actually very short , But if you look carefully , you will see 
19:22-
that all of these long sentences are basically constructed of extremely short self contained units that are glued together with simple conjunctions like but or and indeed , you can 
19:39-
separate into shorter sentences , these self contained units by simply replacing the conjunctions with full stops , and that will not affect the overall style in any major way . 
19:55-
Let us take this sentence from the condition . In the daytime , the street was dusty , but at night they do settled the dust , and the old 
20:5-
man liked to sit late because he was deaf . And now at night it was quiet , and he felt the difference . It's apparently a fairly long sentence . 
20:16-
In fact , there are 40 words in it , but notice how it is actually a conglomeration of shorter units , which can be easily broken up . So 
20:27-
if we simply replace the conjunctions but and end here with full stops , we will get a plaster of very short sentences , and it will read something like 
20:38-
this in the daytime . The street was dusty at night . They do settled that us . The old man liked to sit lied because he was death . 
20:50-
Now , at night , it was quiet . He felt the difference to understand how strikingly knew this language of Hemingway wars , which is shipped under the influence 
21:3-
of the new communication medium of telegraph , I will please here before you another piece of writing from the pre telegraphic era . This is from a piece called 
21:16-
Life of Mr Richard Savage , written by Samuel Johnson , and the publication date here is 17 44 . Samuel Johnson , who is more popularly known as Dr 
21:28-
Johnson , was a major English prose stylist of the 18th century in the Johnsons . Writing Style was so unique and celebrated during his day and age that it 
21:39-
gave birth to the word Johnson Ease , which refers to an elaborate literary style in English that is characterised by the use of a number of long words of 
21:50-
Latin origin and an extravagant phraseology . Here is the example of his writing style . Thus , his poem contributed nothing to the alleviation of his poverty , which 
22:4-
was such as very few could have supported with equal patients , but which it must likewise be confessed that few would have been exposed who received punctually £50 a 
22:16-
year . A salary which dough by no means equal to the demands of vanity and luxury , is yet found sufficient to support families above want and was undoubtedly 
22:31-
more than the necessities of life require . As he will see here , there is no attempt by the author to cut the writing style to the bare minimum . 
22:43-
Rather , the main thrust is to create a writing style which needs to be savoured slowly in order to be properly understood . Clearly , a very different economy 
22:57-
is operating here . Economy of writing is in operation here than the one we saw in hemming with . To begin with , this use of language that we 
23:9-
see in Dr Johnson is much more elaborate and the vocabulary is much more Latinate . Also , the sentence structure is genuinely long and convoluted . That is to 
23:22-
say it is not composed of very short , self contained units which are just glued together by conjunctions . In Johnson styled , the elements of the sentence are 
23:35-
indeed so thoroughly involved that you cannot simply replace any single word or any group of words for that matter with full stocks and arrive at shorter sentences . Thus , 
23:49-
though , the centres that have quoted is an incredibly 78 words long one . We are forced to take all of it in together and make sense of it 
24:1-
as a whole . I find a way in which the 20th century literary critic William Winds at described the writing style of Johnson to be exceptionally act . Talking 
24:16-
about Johnson , Women's are states that he writes like a man and I quote , who marches a short length in one direction , hitting too right and left 
24:26-
as he goes hammers three times at the end , then turns at right angles or back again and repeats this to and from movement marked by repetitions and reinforcements 
24:42-
is very unlike the uni directional movement of Hemingway's pros , which resembles the piece of a high speed train rather than the piece of a man walking at a 
24:53-
leisurely peace Now wonders this comparison . Show us The first thing that it shows is obviously what I have been trying to harp at for some time now , 
25:6-
which is that a change in technology that affects the medium of communication changes the way in which we use language . Dr . Johnson's pro style was what it 
25:21-
was to a large extent because of the medium of communication available during that period . By the time Hemingway was composing his prose , the era of leisurely letter 
25:35-
writing was on the wane and a new mode of communication demanded a crisp or and a more economic pro style . Of course , the greatest effect of this 
25:45-
change was felt in the journalistic pros used in newspapers , because at the end of the day , telegraphic communications were mostly being used by newspaper offices to receive 
25:56-
and send messages about important developments and events . But as we have seen the influence of telegraphy , a new medium of communication was far more widely spread and 
26:10-
even influence the way in which literature was produced . The comparison between Dr Johnson and Hemingway also shows another very important thing , which is that what is considered 
26:26-
to be good and well crafted use of language changes from time to time . Both Johnson and Hemingway were regarded as masters pro stylists of their time . They 
26:40-
were both writing the same language English . And yet , as we have seen , they were dramatically opposite in the ways in which approached this language and framed 
26:55-
this language in their communication . Now I am assured that most a few must have found the language of Hemingway much more accessible than the language of Dr Johnson . 
27:8-
And this is not really a surprise because the kind of technological forces and economy of communication that was in operation during Hemingway's period have only accelerated . The telegraph , 
27:21-
which taught people to shorten their words and sentences to the bare minimum , finds a lot of residence today when a popular communication app like Twitter asks us to 
27:32-
limit our messages to 80 characters . If Dr Johnson was ever to take to Twitter and tweet the same sentence that I have just quoted , it would require 
27:47-
him around three tweets to do that , and it will be absolutely unfeasible . So the point is that in this course we do not speak of how to 
28:1-
write good English . That is because what constitutes good English communication in terms of style has really varied from time to time . What we speak of is how 
28:13-
to communicate in English effectively , and what is effective communication is actually context specific . Johnson's language is simply not effective as communication today , because most of us 
28:30-
are not used to writing all processes such long and involved sentences filled with Lata meet expressions that doesn't necessarily make it a bad use of English language . Indeed , 
28:45-
a simple Google search will show you that there is a huge amount of scholarly writing available , which proves to the reader how greed Johnson was as a pro 
28:54-
stylist . From this course , when I suggest to you ways of improving your communication style , keep in mind that we are talking in a context specific week . 
29:9-
We are concerned with how to communicate effectively today rather than extracting some eternally valid rule of good English use , talking about technology and how it affects communication . 
29:25-
I think all of us will admit that the greatest technological innovation which changed the shape of communication forever , was the invention of writing . And since much of 
29:39-
this court will focus on how to write well , let us dwell a bit on the storey of the written word not to begin with . We need to 
29:48-
remember that we are evolutionarily hardwired to speak . We have specialised organs like our vocal cords and our years to speak and to listen to others . Speaking . 
30:3-
Writing , on the other hand , is not something for which we are evolution , a relief hardwired . In fact , it is entirely and artificially cultivated practise , 
30:17-
and for the most part of it , we need to hijack one or the other organ . We have our eyes , for instance , or our hand to 
30:31-
put them to the use of writing . And if you think about it , he will see that for most part of its existence as a species , human 
30:43-
means have managed to survive just fine without either writing or reading written Tex . In fact , even today , in this age of apparently universal literacy exists a 
30:58-
substantial number of people who can neither read nor right through well in wide ID . Humans pick up this art of writing well . Finding an exact answer to 
31:14-
this question is difficult . But what I can tell you is that human beings did have access to tools which could have enabled them to produce writing for a 
31:26-
very long period of time . In fact , as early as 300,000 years ago , humans knew the use of clea creations of poker colours and okra . Kors , 
31:39-
you know , are naturally occurring pigments , which gets produced in Earth because of the presence of iron oxide . So usually there are two major kinds of walker 
31:51-
colours , red , occur and yellow car . And because these pigments happen naturally in earth , it becomes possible to device Clea crayons with which we can make 
32:6-
a mark on a surface . How exactly The prehistoric man and woman used these clea crayons is not precisely known , but one assumes that they use it to 
32:20-
paint their own bodies and ill eat . Even today , some tribes use such naturally occurring L O U R s to ritually tattoo their bodies . However , 
32:32-
the prehistoric humans gradually found another use of these creations . And this is interesting because they started using these creations to peel the walls of their keys with facility 
32:49-
images of animals that they saw around them . This is one brilliant example of such Keefe painting . It is the image of a bull painted in red ocher 
33:5-
colour , and it is , in fact , one of the earliest evidence that we have of keep painting of an animal , and it probably dates back to 
33:17-
more than 50,000 years . This is found in a cave in Borneo . We have many more such examples of cave paintings from the upper Palaeolithic period that stretched 
33:31-
roughly between 50,000 years to about 12,000 years back . This , for instance , is a series of Rinus Ear's found painted on the walls of the show Kiev 
33:46-
in southern France , painted some 30,000 years ago , and this is image of a charging bison from the Altamira Kiev of northern Spain that is probably around 15 
34:2-
to 20,000 years in India . The earliest Keefe paintings that we have are to be found in a place called him Bait coverages in presently Madhya Pradesh . And 
34:14-
these paintings date back to about 8000 BC , which means they are almost 10,000 years old . And as you can see in this image , they depict human 
34:27-
figures and animals in a uniquely formalised manner , which we still encounter today in India in the form of worldly paintings . Now , why did I spend so 
34:41-
much time discussing Keep being teams to tell you about the storey of writing will . Firstly , I did this to show you that though we do not have 
34:53-
writing samples from so early a period , we do have evidence that humans knew how to use tools which could have been geared towards writing . And secondly , 
35:6-
these paintings are the earliest forms of graphic symbols used by humans . Through them are prehistoric ancestors , expressed not only what they saw in front of them , 
35:18-
but also what they thought and felt about them . Thus , the bulls and the horses and the rhinos and the humans that we encounter in these cave walls 
35:31-
are all stylised figures , which doesn't merely dipping the reality but also present the sense of fear or energy or jubilation that this reality produced in the minds and 
35:47-
the hearts of our ancestors . In that sense , these paintings can be regarded as precursors to are written language because ultimately , what is a written language , 
36:0-
if not a representation through graphic symbols , our thoughts and our emotions ? Indeed , the earliest form of Fritton language that we would be recognised as human writing 
36:13-
per se are mostly pictograms where we would have a very hard time distinguishing the border line between pectoral art and the more utilitarian form of a written symbol . 
36:30-
These pictograms started gaining widespread relevance when human being started giving up their nomadic life of hunting and gathering and settled down as agricultural communities . The economic and administrative 
36:47-
life of such settled communities required the emergence of a princely class and also the emergence of a class of priests in order to take care of leadership and in 
37:3-
order to give spiritual care to the community ill turn . The hierarchical society that developed around these two classes , the class of princes in the class priests required 
37:17-
community members to pay regular taxes to them . Now , as you can well imagine , and organised form of tax collection necessitates some form of record keeping because 
37:32-
the tax account of a whole community cannot just be stored in memory . Last in the urban society that developed in Mesopotamia about 10,000 years ago , we see 
37:46-
the use of clay tokens with signs and symbols to keep track of tax offerings , donations and other such financial transactions . These individual tokens soon give way to 
38:2-
an organised system of graphic symbols , which could be used for the purpose of record keeping . And if we look at such ancient system of graphic science used 
38:15-
for record keeping like , for instance , the Egyptian hieroglyphics , we can see how most of the symbols used for writing are derived from pictorial symbols . Indeed , 
38:28-
such picked a graphic representation still underlined the writing system of a modern language like Chinese . Now , at this point , I would ask you to imagine a 
38:41-
writing system where one pictograms stands for one concept that is to say , one pictograms or pictorial symbol for fish and others pictograms for a bushel of wheat and 
38:58-
other separate pictograms , Let's say , for the depiction of a chariot and so on and so forth . If that is the case , and indeed that was 
39:9-
the case in most of the ancient writing systems , then understandably , you will need a huge number of pictograms to express even the most basic necessities of life . 
39:24-
And you'll need to remember that huge Harry of pictograms in order to decode what has been written . And in fact , this remains a major aspect of any 
39:36-
picked a graphic writing system even today . Thus , for instance , a student of Chinese language is expected to learn 8000 different characters in order to write efficiently . 
39:51-
However , A during the course of the development of the writing system in human history or ancestors gradually realised a very important thing , which is that there need 
40:3-
not be any one on one pectoral correspondence between the written symbol and the thing that is depicted . Bye that's in this realisation revolutionised writing because now a more 
40:24-
simply five alphabet could be designed to signify things , concepts and , most importantly , speak sounds . This led to the development of a phone it X crypt , 
40:41-
where random signs . Random symbols were used to stand for specific phone names or speech sounds at this phonetics script , then transformed the act of writing into something 
40:57-
like the process of voice recording . Thus , just like you can record your voice using a tape recorder or a mobile app , which codes it and then 
41:12-
please it back to you . The written script . The phonetics started operating like a coding app for the spoken word . For instance , as I am lecturing 
41:25-
to you , you can use of phonetics crypt to write down what I am saying and then a third person can read it , and the exact thing that 
41:36-
I am saying here will replay back in his or her mind . This former frightening , as you will note , is very different from the ancient form of 
41:45-
graphic symbols or science . While images were used to stand for individual things rather than for spoken words , this is precisely the invention which allows us to re 
41:59-
create a huge number of words simply by having a limited alphabet , which will only represent the speech sounds operational within a particular language . Now , with the 
42:14-
gradual development of writing , human communications started to acquire certain facets which it did not possess earlier when speech was our only medium available to it . The most 
42:28-
important of this facet is , of course , standardisation . Now the first thing that writing does is to give communication a degree of permanence and stability . Spoken 
42:45-
sounds are , as you all know , effervescent things , which disappear as soon as they are spoken . At least they used to disappear before the invention of 
42:57-
recording devices . Writing gives language a more permanent form , and this stabilised and standardised the language now , as we have already noted , with reference of the 
43:13-
writings of Dr Johnson and Hemingway , the way in which we structure language and we use it in our communication changes with time . But before the advent of 
43:25-
writing , such changes were much faster , not only over a period of time but also over space . Writing , especially writing that uses a phonetic script , 
43:38-
stabilises this tendency for variation by providing a standard form with sets , an example for generation of people . Of course , this stabilisation of language through it's written 
43:52-
form can only have a widespread effect if a written documents are widely produced and read and this wild spread circulation of written documents does not happen in human history 
44:8-
till the invention of the new modern movable type printing technology in the 15th century . As you all know , the modern printing press was invented by a person 
44:23-
called Gutenberg and that really revolutionised our access to written text . Because now cheap versions of written tax could be produced and could be circulated to a wide number 
44:41-
of people before that . In the manuscript age , writing materials was extremely expensive , right and the very process of getting a text written , which would mean 
44:56-
someone painstakingly copying one text from another in order to produce a new text . That very process of producing a text was extremely costed , which meant that writing 
45:11-
and reading was and extremely confined activity . It would not be available to early person . In general , written text starts becoming available to ordinary people only after 
45:30-
Gutenberg invents the modern printing press . And that makes things makes the text the written word much more cheaply available and therefore a lot of people are exposed to 
45:45-
the written form of their language , and you can see this for yourself . If you try and read a page from Geoffrey Chaucer's 14th century book , The 
45:55-
Canterbury tales . When Chaucer was writing this book , it was still an around where printing press was not available , and therefore the written text was not largely 
46:10-
available , which meant that there was no large scale standardisation of English grammar and English pronunciations . Right , and therefore you will find the structuring of the language 
46:24-
in Chaucer , as well as the spelling used by him , are largely unfamiliar to you , though you also know how to read and write in English . 
46:36-
In contrast , if you come down 200 years in history and read a page from one of Shakespeare's plays , you will find it much more comprehensible . The 
46:48-
language of Shakespeare is still very different from the language that you will employ while creating a WhatsApp message , for instance . But the degree of variance is much 
46:59-
smaller than the one that exists between your writing and the writing of Chaucer . And this is because by the time of Shakespeare , printing had already started standardising 
47:11-
English and giving it the grammatical and sell tactical structure , which we are familiar today , and if you come to think of it , this is actually a 
47:21-
stupendous achievement because more than 400 years separate you from Shakespeare in the pre printing era . Language would have changed much more drastically within a similar period of time , 
47:38-
and it would have produced many more linguistic variations . And of course , in a pre writing period , such changes would have been probably even faster . But 
47:50-
having seen this , I would also like to emphasise that the presence or absence of our written form of language , a widely disseminated written form of language , 
48:2-
is only one of the many determinants of why a language changes or remain stable . But it is definitely a major determinant . After the invention of the printing 
48:15-
press which popularised the written text , other changes in the medium of communication have emerged . And as I have said before , with each major change , the 
48:27-
we we communicate has transformed as well . Thus the way communication happened , let a safe 500 years ago did not remain the same when audio visual media emerged 
48:39-
as a significant force within human society . And again , the wee communication happened in the era of audio visual media has not remained exactly the same . When 
48:50-
Internet has become a major factor in how we express ourselves and how we interact with others , If you are interested to know more about these changes in communication 
49:3-
and how they are connected with technological innovations within the field of the medium of communication , I would recommend to you Marshal Pools book titled A History of Communications . 
49:20-
Now , before I conclude today's lecture , I would like to talk a bit about the history of the English language because this course is not just an introduction 
49:30-
to communication . It is also an introduction to English communication . Therefore , a bit of familiarity with how English language emerged and how it developed would help us 
49:41-
frame our future conversation better . The island of Britain , which is today regarded as the epicentre of English language , was in fact originally inhabited by a group 
49:55-
of people who did not speak English . They spoke various Celtic languages . In fact , some of these languages , like Welsh , Irish , Scottish , Gaelic , 
50:6-
are spoken even today . What ultimately developed as English language started emerging in Britain from around the sixth century C , when tribes from continental Europe invaded the east 
50:22-
coast of England by crossing the English Channel . These tribes were primarily the jute , the angles and the Saxons , but they are together referred to as the 
50:37-
Anglo Saxons , and it is the language that these invading people brought with them . That gradually developed into what is now known as English . English is at 
50:53-
its root the language that Anglo Saxons brought to Britain . As Angus action influence spread over the entire island from the East Coast , the English language became all 
51:8-
pervasive and nearly replaced the other Celtic languages of the island , except in certain borderline areas . This language of the Anglo Saxons was further changed by subsequent band 
51:24-
of invaders who brought with them their own cultural and linguistic influences . Thus , first it was the dean's who arrived around the late eighth and early ninth century , 
51:39-
and they introduced a lot of words in the English language . But it was the French invasion that happened in the 11th century in 1066 to be precise , 
51:53-
which had the most long lasting impact on the English language . The most profound ing impact I should not long lasting because even the Danish influence survives today . 
52:6-
But the French influence that happened from after the 11th century was the most profound . So in 1066 a person called William , who was the Duke of Normandy 
52:21-
and Normandy is a region in northern France . He arrived in England , and he defeated the rulers there in the famous battle of Hastings and became the new 
52:33-
king . With the accession of William to the throne . Almost the entire aristocratic class that existed before was dismantled , and a new , frank speaking aristocratic class 
52:47-
was imported from continental Europe . As a result , for centuries , French became the spoken language of the court and of the cultural classes in England . This 
53:3-
had a major impact on the English language , and when it finally emerged from out of the shadows of French , we see that it was thoroughly impregnated with 
53:14-
French loan words . And these Lone World's defying the character of present day English to a very large expect . The Linguist Auto Show How the social changes that 
53:31-
followed the French conquest of 1066 reflected in the domain of language . And I will quote from yes , person here while the names of several animals in their 
53:42-
lifetime our English like ox cow cough sheet swine . Poor dear . They appear on the table with French names . Beef zeal , Mateen , Pork beacon , 
53:59-
Braun , venison . This is generally explained from the French Masters leaving the care of the living animals to the Anglo Saxon lower classes , while they did not 
54:13-
leave much of the meat to be eaten by them . But it may with just as much right be contended that the use of the French words here is 
54:25-
due to the superiority of the French cuisine , which is shown by a greet many other words as well , such as source boil , fry , rose , 
54:35-
toast , pace , the peace trees Who sausage jelly day lt . While the humbler breakfast is English , the more some tress meals like dinner and supper as 
54:49-
well as feasts , generally our French . This effect of social change brought about in the wake of the French conquest can be seen in domains other than food 
55:3-
to thus , for instance , in the area of politics or judiciary or organised religion , which were all under the direct control of the king and the aristocratic 
55:16-
class . We see an abundance of French loan words as well as a Latin lawn words because though French was a spoken language in the court , then Latin 
55:30-
was used for the purpose of writing under the French rulers in England . So we find an abundance of these loan words in any discussion on topics such as 
55:45-
politics on topics such as judiciary topics such as religion or , for that matter , anything that pertains to high culture to fashion . For instance , you cannot 
55:59-
use English language in these fields without using a lot of words that have their origin in French . This history of English language , we're invasion and adoption played 
56:16-
such a big role should give us some degree of confidence about our own engagement with the English language . We were , of course , introduced to the English 
56:25-
language because of colonialism , and given the violent and humiliating process that any colonial subjugation is , we have developed a love hate relationship with the English language . 
56:41-
On the one hand , we do concede that English is an important language that allows us to connect globally , and therefore it is a language that is important 
56:52-
to learn . We also regard English as a kind of colonial hand over that we somehow need to get rid of . While I respect the underlying sentiment here , 
57:5-
I think that there are other ways of thinking about the English language . Firstly , we should realise that even in England , English was not a native language 
57:16-
but was imposed through a violent conquest . Indeed , it was a series of violent conquests of the British I'll that meet the English language what it is today . 
57:29-
But as we have sealed though the social violence has left its mark on the language , the natives of the British island have appropriated the language as their own . 
57:42-
We two in our turn have appropriated a lot of things which were associated with colonial violence . Initially , the miles and miles of railway tracks , for instance , 
57:54-
that crisscross the whole of the Indian subcontinent are as much a colonial import as is the English language . And yet , in spite of our nationalist sentiments , 
58:3-
we never speak of getting rid of the railway tracks just because they were introduced by the colonisers . As an independent nation , we have appropriated the railway system , 
58:15-
and we have learned how to use it to serve our own purpose . English language has by now a very long history of being appropriated and used by Indians , 
58:30-
not only to engage in utilitarian communication but also to express filer thoughts and feelings . Indeed , the first substantial piece of literature , a written in English by 
58:42-
an Indian , which is , incidentally , a travelogue written by a person called Chic Deen Mohammad , who was originally from Patna , dates back to 17 94 . 
58:57-
Incidently Deen Mohammad was also the person who introduced the art of shampooing in England . He travelled to England and there he opened a shampoo parlour . And of 
59:9-
course , the English word shampoo is ultimately derived from the Hindi word champy , which means a head massage . What I am trying to underline here is 200 
59:20-
years is a sufficient amount of time in the life of a national community to feel in possession of a language . Indeed , this sense of possession is important 
59:32-
if we are to communicate in English effectively . So my suggestion is whenever you communicate in English , be confident that you are expressing yourself in a language that 
59:45-
belongs to you rather than in a language which is a colonial baggage and is a sign of foreign oppression . With this in my lecture today , Thank you 