
0:11-
Hello and welcome back to another lecture on English language communication . By now , we are all familiar with the basic elements are required to transmit and receive knowledge 
0:22-
and ideas quoted in the form of language to briefly recapitulate . We have discussed four such components . Three of these components are internal to us and one is 
0:37-
external to us . The internal components constitute of firstly are a sensory motor system that allows us to produce , and here verbal sounds , speech sounds . The 
0:52-
second internal component constitutes of our ability to conceptualise ideas that can be coded as language and transmitted as language . The third and of course , the most important 
1:7-
internal element is what is referred to as the which is , as you know , basically a computational mechanism that connects our ability to conceptualise ideas and knowledge and 
1:23-
our ability to articulate it verbally as language . These three internal components are supplemented by one external component , which is the medium of communications . Now , as 
1:41-
we have seen in the previous lecture , the medium of communication keeps changing with time , and the main force behind such change is technological innovations . It was 
1:55-
availability of her coloured clea creations that first taught our and sisters to make graphic signs on the walls of the keys . These graphic signs as expressions of thoughts 
2:9-
and emotions leader gave we to the more utilitarian writing system that were used for record keeping . The earliest form of human writing that we have today are impressed 
2:26-
on Clea tablets . But later on with technological innovations , other writing medium started becoming available like the skin of animals , for instance , or leaves of various 
2:40-
trees . The most important technological innovation in the field of writing materials was perhaps the invention of perp iris . And this , of course , gives rise to 
2:57-
the later , more familiar word people . As you know , perp Iris looks and feels something like a very thick and coarsely textured people . And this was 
3:13-
first being used by Egyptians around 5 to 6000 years ago . Now this was a definite improvement over clea tablets or even animal skins , because Piris we's much 
3:31-
less and therefore can be transported and stored more easily . Also , you could make large rules of perp iris , which allowed you to communicate more voluminous messages . 
3:47-
But here we need to remember that irrespective of the availability of such writing materials like Paris for the greater part of the human history , the medium of writing 
4:3-
and consequently , the written text was not very easily available to people at large before the majority of the people on this earth . Communication therefore meant to verbal 
4:16-
communication , and the ability to communicate message over long distance was extremely limited . An ordinary man , for instance , could communicate only as far as his voice 
4:30-
would go or as his lengths would take him . This , however , changed dramatically with the invention of the modern printing press in the 15th century . Around 
4:44-
the middle of the 15th century , Johannes Gutenberg , German Goldsmith used what is called the movable type printing press for the first time to print a copy of 
5:0-
the Bible . And this ushered in the era of mass communication . Now here , let me explain this link between printing and mass communication a bit , as 
5:14-
have already mentioned before the availability of printing presses . The process of reproducing a book was difficult and cumbersome , and because it was difficult and communism , it 
5:27-
was also very costly . Think about our Indian Siege vedra as , for instance , and his dilemma , he is said to have composed the epic of Maha 
5:39-
Bharat in his head , but then he wanted someone to write it down . This was because otherwise the only process of transmitting that text would be , too . 
5:53-
Get hold of someone who would be able to memorise act text and then for that person to get hold of someone else and make that person memorise so that 
6:4-
text is transmitted Now . I haven't read Mahabharata in Sanskrit , but I can tell you that the most recent English translation of the whole text runs for more 
6:16-
than 5000 pages and in a fairly small print size , too . So you can very well imagine the practical problem involved in transmitting such attacks merely through memorisation . 
6:29-
And thus , though , the text does mention about how it was transmitted orally through individuals like buy some pion , for instance , of it also mentions , 
6:39-
whereas they was quest for a scribe . Now , here we are not interested in the historicity of the figure of Via Steve Rather . What we are interested 
6:49-
in is the practical problems that someone in his place would have faced , which is the problem of finding a scribe in any society . Before the arrival of 
7:1-
printing press , the literate population was extremely limited . Think about it . If you were a mediaeval present or if you are a present living in incident India , 
7:15-
why on earth would you take all that P in that is required to learn to read and write ? Because for all you know , you'd never be able 
7:26-
to see the face of a written book in your entire life . And also , as a present , you would not be able to afford the writing implements 
7:34-
even if you were to sell off all new properties . The scribe was therefore a highly specialised person practising a highly specialised profession . And to find someone who 
7:47-
could write down your text was rare indeed . Of course , if you are a king or a nobleman , you could keep some scribes in your paper so 
7:57-
as to maintain the official documents of your state . But for an ordinary person , finding ascribe was almost an impossibility . Mahabharata tells us that Viasa ultimately found 
8:11-
his scribe in the elephant headed God Ganesha , but again , historicity apart . Even if one in Reza's position would have managed to find a divine scribe , 
8:24-
the problem of writing down and transmitting the text it's written form would not be over because Ganesha or an equivalent scribe would produce only one text , right ? 
8:39-
If you really wanted to spread that written text among a number of people , you would have needed an army of scribe to copy it down and produce several 
8:51-
volumes of that same text . And as you can very well understand . If finding one scribe was difficult , how much more difficult it was to find an 
9:2-
army of scribes who would be ready to copy and produce replicas of the same text again and again for transmissions . If we shift from the India of the 
9:15-
Asus time to the Europe of the medial period , we would see that there existed a section within the church , a section of clergy's who have educated and 
9:29-
who acted as that army of scribes . The painstakingly reproduced the written text using their exquisite handwriting and produced multiple copies of texts illuminated with beautiful designs and paintings , 
9:46-
which we can see even today in a number of museums . This , for instance , is an illuminated page from a gospel produced , most probably in the 
9:57-
early eighth century , in a place called Lindus Fun in England . Now , as you will see , this is nothing less than an artwork . And just 
10:9-
like any artwork today , both its production and its consumption was limited to a very narrow circle of elites who could afford to buy it . The invention of 
10:24-
the modern printing press revolutionised this process of production and consumption by allowing one to print mechanically hundreds of copies of the same written page in a matter of minutes . 
10:40-
This greatly cheap and the price of the book . And over the course of time , written materials started becoming available to a large Mars of people . This 
10:53-
meant that with the you are sitting here for somewhere else or some distant corner of this world . Whatever you were thinking , you could write it down . 
11:12-
Not only could you write it down , he would also get it printed . Thousands and thousands of copies of that print could then be dispatched to the different 
11:24-
corners of the world . And with the speeding up of the transport system , thanks especially to the innovation of the steam engine , it meant that your written 
11:37-
word printed could travel to the four corners of the world in a matter of months . Similarly , irrespective of wherever US situated , you now felt more connected 
11:51-
with the rest of the world because you could read about what was happening and what was being thought and written and published in different corners of the world , 
12:1-
because printed texts were now available to you . So let's say whatever was being printed in 19th century London would be available to a person sitting in 19th century 
12:17-
Kolkata in a matter of months , if not weeks . In our previous lecture , we have seen how a technological innovation like electric telegraphy you will further revolutionised 
12:30-
the circulation speed of messages and how this process of speeding up has continued even up to our digital age . We have also discussed how , with each such 
12:44-
technological revolution , the we we communicate have drastically changed . Thus , as we saw , the Popularisation of the telegraphic message is brought with it a completely new 
12:58-
pro style , which was championed not only by journalists but also by importance novelists like Ernest Hemingway . Today I'm going to start moving towards a different direction by 
13:11-
picking up on something that I mentioned in my previous lecture , which was standardisation . I had said how the invention of writing and the popularisation of the written 
13:24-
text through the availability of printing press standardised language . Such standardisation of language happens as an effect of codification of the language . Use and codification means laying down 
13:41-
of certain rules and normative patterns of Gramma , syntax , autocracy , etcetera . And as you will understand from common sense , such codification of a language can 
13:54-
happen only when we can regularise the language in the more stable form of writing . Now one of the various things that writing regularise iss and standardises in a 
14:8-
language is it's pronunciation . Here you might not something interesting . A phonetic script used for writing is supposed to faithfully inscribe faithfully duplicate the sound of speech right , 
14:27-
which means how we pronounce is supposed to control how we right . However , since writing codifies and standardise is , it also starts standardising are pronunciation and therefore 
14:43-
the relation between speech and writing often gets reversed . Here . Here , we have to remember that any kind of standardisation of language happens over a very long 
14:54-
period of time , and the standardisation of pronunciation only happens when the codification and regularisation of language reaches an extremely advanced stage . There has spent some time here 
15:10-
to see how the history of standardisation of English language unfolded and how it reached a stage where even the pronunciation of English words got standardised . A modern standard 
15:24-
English started emerging during the period of Geoffrey Chaucer , who was 1/14 century port and the composer of the famous poem Accountability Ls . This trend towards standardisation was 
15:40-
greatly eded in the next century , when a merchant named William Caxton brought the technique of modern printing from continental Europe to England . Incidently , one of the 
15:54-
first books that Caxton printed in England was trusses The Canterbury Tales by early 17th century . We see various proposals being floated for the establishment of an English academy 
16:8-
by the government , which would ratify language use and help uniform allies the English language though such a proposal never fact ified . We see that a similar academy 
16:22-
was in fact established in France in 16 35 to oversee the standardisation of the French language in England in 17 55 we see Dr Johnson , whom we have 
16:37-
already encountered in our previous lecture publishing his English Dictionary , and this dictionary had a widespread effect in regularising the spelling and meaning of English words . 18th century 
16:52-
was also a period when several books were published in concluding Robert Lot's influential a short introduction to English Gramma that codified and standardised the usage of English drama again . 
17:8-
It was in the late 18th century that we see the popularisation of Prommin station dictionaries like John Walker's Critical Pronouncing Dictionary , which said the standards regarding how to 
17:22-
articulate English words . However , it was only in the beginning of the 20th century that English pronunciation was fully codified as standardised bye . Someone called Daniel Jones , 
17:36-
and this was what came to be regarded as standard English and was referred to . In fact , it's still referred to as a received English pronunciation and is 
17:51-
officially regarded by institutions like the BBC British Broadcasting Corporation as a standard pronunciation of British Isles . Now , in this lecture , I would try to give you 
18:5-
a few pointers about how to work on your articulation of English words so that you can approximate the received English pronunciation . But before that , we need to 
18:16-
confront something head on . In my own experience of speaking English , as well as teaching basic English communication to students who have had limited exposure to this language , 
18:32-
I have seen that this notion of court and court correct pronunciation have always acted as a bogey , which makes us afraid to even open our mouth . It 
18:48-
is not a new rule to see people being mocked and humiliated to a very great extent for their accent and pronunciation . And given that there is a certain 
19:1-
status associated with the English language in Indian society , people often regard those who cannot pronounce English correctly as socially in serious . The fear of such stigma naturally 
19:18-
hinders our desire to speak in English . Indeed , tremendously increases our frustration when we are compelled to speak in English in certain context , and yet we are 
19:29-
unsure of our pronunciation . Now the only we out of this frustration is to consciously work on our articulation of English words . But at the same time , 
19:41-
I would also request you not to be too overwhelmed with this notion of correct pronunciation . For instance , will only have to listen to any one of my 
19:53-
lectures to know that they are quite filled with pronunciations , which are very different from how the received finance station of a BBC broadcast sounds . And yet I 
20:5-
am sure that you are being able to comprehend perfectly well whatever I am sharing with you , so what I want to stress here is that effective communication does 
20:18-
not always require a very high degree of abidin ce to the norm . It is always good to try and approximate the standard English pronunciation as closely as possible . 
20:31-
But just the fact that there exists a gap between the standard pronunciation and the wee you articulate your English words does not mean that you cannot communicate effectively . 
20:48-
In fact , according to the celebrated Irish plea right George Bernard Shaw , there will always exist Such a gap and an absolute standardisation of English pronunciation is indeed 
21:2-
impossible in practical terms , to give you some courage about speaking in English in spite of all your anxieties regarding the possible shortcomings of here , pronunciation and your 
21:14-
accent lately read out a bit from a radio message that Bernard Shaw delivered in 1927 . In that message , Shore states and I read , Whether you're a 
21:28-
foreigner or a native , the first thing I must impress on you is that there is no such thing as ideally correct English . No . Two British subjects 
21:43-
speak exactly alike . I am a member of a committee established by the British Broadcasting Corporation for the purpose of deciding how the utterances of speakers employed by the 
21:58-
corporation should be pronounced in order that the should be a model of correct English speech for the British islands . That committee knows as much as anyone knows about 
22:12-
English speech , and yet its members do not agree as to the pronunciation of some of the simplest and communist words in the English language . The two simplest 
22:27-
and communist words in any language are yes and no . But no . Two members of the committee pronounced them exactly alike . I hope these lines by sure 
22:41-
will give you the impetus to overcome you hesitation . If you have any regarding your English pronunciation and you would start speaking in this language , However , I 
22:56-
am not saying that you completely disregard any effort to improve your English pronunciation . In fact , you should . So let me now offer you a few pointers 
23:9-
towards that direction . Now the pronunciation of any word in any language involves articulating two different but related components . The first component is a consul int , and 
23:25-
the second is a vows . Now , usually , when I tell my students about these two components , they appear to be on familiar territory . Thus , 
23:37-
for instance , when I asked them about the vowels . The immediately answer that there are five vowels in English language E u . Some smart students even add 
23:53-
a few semi vowels to this list like W and why . But if you look at this list carefully , you will see that as far as pronunciation is 
24:6-
concerned , this list is really not are very great . Help Think the first vowel in the list . Here are a few words which have a as part 
24:19-
of its spelling . And yet , if you try and pronounce these words and pronounce them fairly correctly , you will see that the sound of the letter A 
24:28-
is different in each of them . Thus , the first word is pronounced as back where the A sounds like air . In the second word bar , the 
24:44-
A is pronounced as our in the third word ball . The A is pronounced as and in the fourth word bit . The A is pronounced as so in 
25:4-
all these forwards . It is only in the last word that the pronunciation somewhat resembles how we usually pronounce A as a standalone letter . This should make us 
25:16-
realise at least two points . The first is that there are many more vowel sounds in English language than merely the five . Secondly , there is no 1 
25:32-
to 1 Correspondence between the letter signifying of foul and the war will sound . The same letter may indicate different vowel sounds . Here . We can complicate the 
25:46-
picture even further by considering these two words Ball and got in booth the words The vowel sound is somewhat similar , it sounds like , however , if you 
26:3-
look in the first word the spelling of it , you will see that the letter indicating the war will sound is just a whereas in the second word , 
26:14-
the same vowel sound or at least a similar of all sound is indicated by two letters A and the U . So this should alert you to the fact 
26:27-
that in English language there is a distinction between what we call vowel letters and vowel sounds . Now you might remember that in my earlier lecture , I had 
26:41-
mentioned that languages like English are written using a fanatic script , which means that the writing system should ideally reproduce faithfully the sound of the spoken word , right ? 
26:56-
So why is there a discrepancy between how we pronounce English words and how we write them and as we shall see in English . This discrepancy is not only 
27:9-
confined to for walls , but also to consul in SW . Thus , for instance , the Consul int s is pronounced differently in the word seat and the 
27:24-
world leisure . So why are there these differences ? Well , to understand that you will first have to understand that the writing system that we used today to 
27:38-
write English is borrowed from Latin . You remember that the English language developed from a language or a group of languages that was brought to Britain . Bye . 
27:54-
The Anglo Saxon tribes from continental England during the fifth century . However , the writing system that we used to write English today was borrowed from Latin , as 
28:6-
I mentioned and was introduced by Irish Catholic missionaries around the eighth century . So how does this affect the fanatic transcription of English language ? Well , imagine a 
28:20-
situation where you are using the same Latin , which you used to write English today to write an Indian language like Bangla , for instance , or him the 
28:32-
or Tamil . We , in fact to it all the time while writing what's up messages , for instance , or while sending informal emails country now in such 
28:44-
a situation , you must have realised that you have to deal with a set of letters that are often not quite suitable to reproduce the sound of Indian languages . 
28:56-
I will give you an example from my mother tongue Bangla in Bangla . There is a very relevant difference between the sounds tour her the and third . However , 
29:12-
while using the Latin script , we are stuck with either the letter T or the letters T H brought together to signify all these varieties of sounds that I 
29:27-
just mentioned . This automatically results in confusion . Indeed , this same problem is also present in the English language , where the Latin script and author gra phy 
29:41-
often forms the basis of a language . Who's pronunciation is slightly different from the written . However , the major reason why we are often left confused while trying 
29:55-
to judge the pronunciation of an English word from its spelling is the great vowel shift . Now this term was coined by the Danish linguist or two yes , 
30:7-
person whom we have already met in our previous lecture . The Great Wall will shift that he worked on , and that he coined actually refers to the major 
30:18-
ways in which the articulation of English vowels , cheese primarily during the 15th and 16th century , which took the pronunciation of the English words very far away . 
30:33-
Indeed , from how they are written now , there are different and often conflicting views about how and why this vowel shift occurred , so we will not go 
30:47-
into that . We will also not go into the technicalities about the various changes that were affected by this shift . But what he would like to stress here 
30:57-
is because of this shift and also because of certain other factors . The English language , in its written form , does not replicate the English pronunciations very accurately , 
31:9-
which is why , as we have seen in our first lecture , we use a different set of alphabets known as the International phonetic alphabet , or in short , 
31:21-
when we are required to transcribe exactly the speed sounds of an English word , or indeed of any word in any language . For that matter . Such an 
31:33-
international phonetic alphabet is required because various amounts of discrepancy can be found when we compare the spoken form of a language with how it is written down with its 
31:48-
crypt . However , one must admit that the discrepancy in case of English is especially notable and most particularly in the pronunciation of vowels . And I think this 
32:1-
is the primary reason why many of us feel unsure about speaking in English . I will try and sort out some of these difficulties about announcing English vowels in 
32:15-
this lecture , but before that , let us briefly dwell upon the pronunciation of English consequence . So Water Consul Ins's and how are they different , too , 
32:28-
and related to vowels . Let me court here from Leslie Jeffrey's book Discovering Language , and I will again and again referred to this book in this lecture . 
32:42-
So explaining the two terms consulates and vowels Jeffries rights . We have already seen how speech is produced by modifying the outgoing air from a speakers breath . The 
32:58-
qualitative difference between consonant and vowels is due to the different kinds of modification the two categories of sound make to this air . Streams whiles consul in SW squeeze 
33:13-
and constrict the air flow to the extent of sometimes stopping it altogether . Vowels allow free passage of air through the mouth and knows , but with variable shaped 
33:28-
cavity in which the sound resonates differently , causing the different sounds of the vowels . So the basic idea is that consonance are formed through restricting the flow of 
33:45-
our breath , whereas vowels are produced by manipulating the sheep of the cavity , in which the sound resonance while allowing the breath to flow freely without any stoppage . 
33:58-
Now , as far as pronouncing the consonance are concerned , three things are important to note . First is the place of articulation . That is to say , 
34:13-
which part of the vocal tract is being used to restrict the flow of our break while we pronounce a particular consul mint . The second is manner of articulation . 
34:28-
This deals with the manner in which the breath is restricted and released , and the third is whether the consonance are voiced or not . Whether they remain unveil 
34:43-
waist Now , the difference between voiced and on voiced is in case of voiced consonance . We vibrate are vocal chords while pronouncing them , whereas in a kn 
34:58-
voiced consul in SW , that vibration is missing . Now , as far as the place of articulation is concerned , the restriction of the breath can be caused 
35:9-
by pressing together or bringing closer various parts of our vocal tract like our lips , for instance , or one lip and the teeth or the tongue and various 
35:24-
parts of the roof of our oral cavity and so on and so forth . So , for instance , if you pronounce the consul int p Perth Sound , 
35:35-
you will see that we are pronouncing it by restricting our breath with our lips again . When pronounced the consul int terror sound , you will see we are 
35:49-
restricting the breath by pressing our tongue against the bony ridge just behind the upper set of our teeth . If he pronounce a consonant key car sound , we 
36:3-
see that the restriction of the breath happens deeper down inside our oral cavity . And while pronouncing the consulate G ger sound , we move even deeper down within 
36:17-
our vocal tract . Now , depending on each of these places of articulation , consonance are divided into different categories . I am not going to go into the 
36:28-
terminology of these different categories because I think that would unnecessarily complicate your life At this point , however , if you are interested to learn more about it , 
36:39-
I would definitely recommend Leslie Jefferies's book Discovering Language as a preliminary read . Now let us come to the manner of articulation , as I have just mentioned while 
36:52-
pronouncing Consul in SW , we restrict and release our breath in different ways and we can categorise consulates on the basis of these we's or manners , in which 
37:4-
we deal with our breath during the pronunciation of particular consequence . Now think of consonance like TT or K , the purse ound the terse sound and the curse 
37:17-
sound . If you pay attention to how you are pronouncing them , he will see that each of these consonance have different places of articulation . But in all 
37:28-
of them , the manner in which the breath is restricted and released remains the same , that is to say , while pronouncing each of these Consul in SW , 
37:40-
we create a restriction in different parts of our vocal track and then let the outgoing breath build up behind that restriction till the pressure from that breath bursts open 
37:56-
the channel . So each of these Consul in are produced in the form of small explosions and are referred to as close of consonance . That is the name 
38:9-
of the category . Compare this to how we pronounce consonance like F V for and over sounds , and you'll notice that the manner in which the breath is 
38:22-
restricted and released is different Here . In case of these litre consonance are part of the vocal track is highly constricted , but the flu of air is not 
38:35-
entirely stopped . Thus , instead of an explosive sound , you get the sound of a friction . So the consonance articulated in this manner . They are called 
38:50-
the Frick a Tibbs . Again , there are a number of such different categories of Consul in SW , depending on the manner of their articulation . And again , 
39:1-
the book by Leslie Jeffries is a good first read if you want to look into all these different categories . Finally I come to voiced and a NV iced 
39:12-
consonance here . As I have already told you , the distinction is based on weather while pronouncing the consonant . You are vibrating your vocal cords or your vocal 
39:22-
fools , or you are not five breeding them . Now try pronouncing the two consul in SW s and Zed the sound and the Tzar sound . So in 
39:39-
the first case , if you prolong the sound of that consul int , you will get something like his right . On the other hand , in the second 
39:56-
case , if you prolong the sound , you will get a buzz , something like If you observe carefully , you will see that one key difference between the 
40:10-
first sound and The second sound is that the second one is produced through a vibration of your vocal folds . In fact , you should be able to feel 
40:21-
that vibration down your throat . This is why we will say that the pronunciation of the sound is voiced , whereas the pronunciation of the sound is a NV 
40:35-
iced . You can try out the same experiment with other consonance , like the for sound and of sound . And if you do that , he will see 
40:46-
that they're the pronunciation of the worst . Sound is voiced and the first sound is a NV iced Now . As you might have noticed , I have deliberately 
40:58-
not presented in a diagram of the vocal tract or a list of categories of consul in SW . This is because I do not think memorising them would be 
41:9-
of any help to you . As far as improving your pronunciation is concerned , What you need to remember is as far as pronunciation of consulates are concerned , 
41:19-
these other three key elements place of articulation , manner of articulation and vibration of local calls and these other three key elements which make all the difference . I 
41:37-
am sure in today's day and each the Internet provides you with ample resources to listen to standard pronunciation of a particular word , and I would really encourage you 
41:47-
to do that whenever you are in doubt about the pronunciation of a particular word . However , when you listen to the standard pronunciation and try and imitate it , 
41:58-
you should remember the three things that I just mentioned , and we can use the acronym V P M to remember the three things . So we stands for 
42:8-
voice tour on voiced P stands for place of articulation and M stands for manner of articulation . However , since one is not always sure about what the Internet 
42:22-
teaches us , the Internet teachers as a lot of things and not all of them are correct . I think a safer way of learning about the standard pronunciation 
42:30-
of a word is by consulting a dictionary . And by the way , here I want to stress that if you are serious about polishing you English or if 
42:40-
you are serious about using the language more effectively , you need to have access to a good dictionary , and there are a number of them available in the 
42:50-
market . I remember growing up with my father's Cambridge Learner's Dictionary as a constant companions , So I can definitely recommend you that also , if you are a 
43:0-
member of an institute like for sins iit , Kanpur , then you will have online access to the Oxford English Dictionary , and you can and you should also 
43:9-
use that now . Either way , the point is you need to be able to consult a good dictionary regularly now . Usually we consulted dictionary to find the 
43:22-
meaning or me . Ling's of a word , a word , as we will find out , can have a number of meanings . But we can and we 
43:30-
should consult a dictionary also for pronunciation and for various other language functions as well . You will come to know about some of these users , apart from just 
43:42-
finding the many of a word for which we can use a dictionary as we go along . But for now , let me focus on how we can decipher 
43:51-
the standard pronunciation of a word by consulting a dictionary . No , if you consult any good dictionary , you will find it's pronunciation inscribed next to the main 
44:2-
word entry in fanatic transcription . Here , for instance , you can see the entry of the World communication as it appears in the online version of Oxford English 
44:13-
Dictionary . As you can see at the very beginning of the entry , the dictionary gives you the fanatic transcription of the word , indicating it's standard pronunciation in 
44:22-
Britain , marked by the word Brit and in North America marked by the word us , the to play buttons can be used to listen to those two versions 
44:34-
of the pronunciation . But let us focus on the phonetic transcription for the moment and more specifically on the fanatic transcription of the British transition . Now , any 
44:45-
dictionary which gives you such a fanatic transcription in the form of a fanatic script will also give you a fanatic key usually placed at the beginning of the entire 
44:57-
dictionary . And this phonetic key will be more or less a variation of the so the phonetic e of Oxford English Dictionary looks something like this . This is 
45:11-
only part of the list of consulate symbols that are used , and in fact it continues a little longer . If you scroll down , you will be able 
45:19-
to see that , and then you have a similar list for walls as well . The important part here is that each symbol represents a very specific speech sound , 
45:30-
and you can know the speed sound of that particular symbol by knowing how to pronounce the simple words written next to it , which are used in the as 
45:41-
examples . Now , if we go back to the list of symbols used in Oxford English Dictionary to signify the consul in sounds , and if we look at 
45:52-
the consulate symbol used in this list , you will see that the word used as an example is jet , which means the sound that that particular symbol represents 
46:5-
is the jer sound . As it appears in the word jet , we will similarly find out from this key the exact speech sound of all of the phonetic 
46:15-
symbols used in that dictionary . And you can then use this fanatic key to decode the fanatic transcription of all the words in this dictionary . Now that we 
46:26-
know the method of checking the standard pronunciation of a word , let us look at a few words and let us see how we pronounce the consequence there . 
46:37-
Now , let us start with a very simple word van . Now , if you go to any IP symbol Kiev available widely on the Internet , just do 
46:48-
a Google search and get it . You will see that the pronunciation of the first letter is work , and this is in fact the same pronunciation as you 
46:59-
have of the letter V in words like view or heavy or move , for instance . Now let us analyse this pronunciation using the V P M model that 
47:14-
we discussed before , Firstly , the consonant that we have in front of us . The were sound is a voiced sound . So if you are pronouncing the 
47:27-
concert without voicing it , then you are doing it wrong . Let us now come to the place of its articulation . This consul int is what is technically 
47:38-
called a labia dental , which means it is produced by restricting the breath by joining the lower lip and the upper set off teeth . Now I have heard 
47:51-
many pronounce this consonant as a buy label rather than a Libya dental , which means that they use their lips to stop the breath rather than the lower lip 
48:6-
and the upper set of teeth . And they produce a sound like Bob in various Indian languages is a very popular speed sound , but it is absent in 
48:19-
English . So if you're pronouncing Van as Ban , for instance , you will know that you are wrong by checking the place of articulation , and you can 
48:30-
correct yourself simply by shifting from the by label position to the Libya Dental positions . Incidently . If you're pronouncing Van as Ban , you are also getting the 
48:41-
manner of articulation wrong . The consonant sound worth is a frick , a tive , that is to say while pronouncing eight , the airflow is constricted but never 
48:55-
completely stopped . The sound bar , on the other hand , is a close if VVe . So again , you can correct yourself by adjusting the manner of 
49:6-
articulation . That's whenever you are in doubt about a consonant . Just analyse the sound through applying to it the V P M . Model , and you can 
49:16-
make the necessary adjustments regarding voicing the consonant or regarding its place of articulation and manner of articulation , and you will get it right now . Let us look 
49:31-
at the set of three words . Here they are . And as I have already mentioned , the way English words are often proves to be a very poor 
49:40-
guide about how the words are pronounced . The way in which the letters T H is pronounced in each of these three words provide us with a very good 
49:52-
example of how what we see written on the page as far as English language is concerned , can misguided us . In the first case , the pronunciation is 
50:4-
in the next case . The pronunciation is , and in the final case , the pronunciation is the The word teams is therefore pronounced with a consul in't that 
50:15-
is a NV iced close if VVe and articulated by joining the tongue with the Al Viola ridge that is a bony ridge behind the upper set of teeth . 
50:27-
The word theatre intern is pronounced with a consonant that is an unveil waste Frick , a tive which is articulated by placing the tongue behind the upper . So 
50:37-
the place of articulation as well as the manner of articulation , changes here in case of the word . Rather , the consonant is a voiced Frick , a 
50:47-
tive which again is articulated by placing the tongue behind the upper set of teeth . You can similarly find out the difference between the pronunciation of the letter s 
50:59-
in words like pleasant and pleasure . The pronunciation is very different in one word if you compare it to the other and you can also look at how the 
51:13-
letter s is pronounced in the word sin and compare it with how it is pronounced in the word shin , and they are very different . Talking about English 
51:25-
Spellings misguiding you about how to pronounce a particular word . I also need to caution you about how , in certain English words , the consul int sounds are 
51:36-
dropped altogether , though you find them written on the page eating the word knee , for instance . It starts with Keith . But as far as it's pronunciation 
51:49-
is concerned , we do not have any curse sound at the beginning . Incidentally , Geoffrey Chaucer in 14th century might have pronounced the word knee with that initial 
52:2-
curse sound , which tells you something about how the pronunciation of English words have changed over a period of time . But please don't use trouser as an excuse 
52:14-
to mispronounce the word . Today there are other common words which dropped one consulate or the other . For instance , the word island is pronounced without the s 
52:29-
sound . The word Wednesday is pronounced without the D sound . The word fair is pronounced without the our sound , and there are many more such examples . 
52:45-
I just gave you a few . Now , here , I wish I had some simple rule to share with you so that you could detect which consonant , 
52:55-
if any , is being dropped just by looking at a particular word . But I am afraid there isn't any simple rules like that . So just listen , 
53:5-
to agree to deal of English and listen consciously . That's the key . And as far as the consonance or concern do , keep referring to the VP model 
53:15-
and keep checking your pronunciation again and again and use a good dictionary and you will be sorted . So now let us move to the volumes . The problem 
53:28-
with vowels is that unlike consul in SW , we do not have a V P M model here to help us to begin with . All valuables are voiced , 
53:39-
so there is no question of having outset of voice to bobbles and having another set of a kn voiced the police of articulation and the manner of articulation . 
53:51-
Again , they are not very dramatically different in case of vowels , and therefore the V P M classification does not quite work . This , however , does 
54:1-
not mean that there is no classification of viable sound . Someone like the annual Jones , for instance , has classified English rubbles under various categories like closed and 
54:12-
open front and back , etcetera . And here again , if you want to study about these classifications , do refer to the book by Leslie Jeffries . But 
54:22-
I am not going to discuss these categories because I don't think that these categories are really going to help you pronounce English vowels better . Of course , if 
54:34-
you are very keen into understanding the fanatics of English language , you should go into these classifications . But otherwise I don't think they are of much help . 
54:46-
So again , the key is listening consciously and imitating what you hear carefully . But having said that , I would never the less like to talk about a 
54:58-
few things which might help you with their pronunciations of English bobbles . The first thing that I want to focus upon is the length of the vowel sound . 
55:11-
Now , as Indians , we often mix up the length of English rivals , and this often changes the meaning of the word that we are speaking . Take , 
55:22-
for instance , these two words ship and sheep . In the first word , the pronunciation of the valuable is short , and in the next word in the 
55:33-
second word , the pronunciation of the vowel is long . In fact , this length of the two vowels is the only difference in the pronunciation of these two 
55:44-
words and in turn is the only difference that distinguishes the meaning of these two words . So if you pronounce ship as sheet , you immediately changed the meaning 
55:59-
of the world's similarly cheque . These following pairs of words cut and cart , foot and food got and court in each of the pairs . The first word 
56:13-
has a short and the second word has a long vowel . So do keep these things in mind . The second thing that I wanted to mention about vowel 
56:27-
sounds is different . Lift Hong is a sound where there is a glide between two vowels . The vowel sound is constituted of a glide , which makes it 
56:42-
sound more complex . It's a compounding of vowels . You can look at it like that . Take the example of the word try , for instance . Now , 
56:54-
when you pronounce it , you will see that the vowel sound glides from the two try and therefore has a composite and complex character . Now , as Indian 
57:11-
speakers of English , we often miss out on the diff thongs , and we end up there deviating from the standard pronunciation . Take the word beak , for 
57:23-
instance . Now , if you carefully look at the finance station of the letter , you will see that it involves a glide , a diff throng where the 
57:35-
vowel sound starts with and ends in bake . Similarly , note the word stew here again . There is a glide involved as far as the viol sound is 
57:52-
concerned . On the other hand , I have also seen some people using def thongs or define ising vowel sounds when actually the wall will sound is pretty straightforward . 
58:8-
Take , for instance , the word group . I have heard people pronouncing it as blue . That's actually not the standard pronunciation . The standard pronunciation is pretty 
58:19-
straightforward blue , just like clue . The final point about the war will sound . That I would like to give you is that often the vowel sound of 
58:30-
a word changes when any additional component is added to the word . Take the viable sound of the word clean . For instance , it changes dramatically when we 
58:42-
encounter it in the form of the word cleanliness , clean cleanliness . Similarly , look at the word pronounce . Right now . The sound of its vowel again 
58:59-
changes dramatically when we encounter it in the form of another word pronunciation pronounce pronunciation , so to keep yourself alert regarding these changes that happen . But I would 
59:17-
like to end my talk by against stressing that don't get scared by the bogey of correct pronunciation . Deviating from the standard articulation of the words does not mean 
59:31-
that you will not be understood or that your communication will not be effective , so be confident and keep speaking in English . 