
0:10-
dear friends , Welcome back to another lecture on English language communication . In a previous lecture , we have discussed how we can improve our pronunciation . We have 
0:25-
discussed some crucial things that we need to keep in mind as far as English language finance ation is concerned . We talked about how the V P M model 
0:34-
can help us locate the correct pronunciation of English consonance by focusing on whether that consulate is voiced or a NV iced by focusing on its place of articulation and 
0:48-
also by focusing on the manner of its articulation . And we also talked about the three key elements that we need to be careful about as far as pronouncing 
0:59-
English vowels are concerned . And just to remind you , these three elements were , firstly the length of the wobble sound , the use of def tongs , 
1:12-
and also if the sound of the vowel changed with the addition of new elements like perfect or suffix to the root word . Now , before we move on , 
1:24-
I would briefly like to touch upon another aspect of English pronunciation , which you might want to work on . This is the aspect of stress or Indonesians . 
1:37-
Now , if you pay attention to the language that you are speaking , and this can be any language , not necessarily English . You notice that while speaking , 
1:49-
you employ a rather complex pattern of stress . Now there are segments of individual words as well as segments of sentences that you are emphasising by either speaking them 
2:4-
out loudly or by modulating the frequency of your pitch or by elongating the pronunciation . Now in certain languages , these techniques of emphasising or of Indonesian are very 
2:21-
important , and they need to be learnt very carefully . In case of Chinese , for instance , just a variation of tune can drastically change the meaning of 
2:31-
a word . However , in English , these techniques of emphasis seldom if ever , have any grammatical import or any effect on the meaning of a particular world . 
2:45-
However , this is not to say that pronunciation of English words and sentences lack stress you need . Like any other language , they do employ a complex pattern 
3:0-
of stresses and Indonesians , and observing them carefully would help you make your English sound closer to the normative speaking style of the received pronunciations . I will give 
3:15-
you an example . Take these two words . For instance , the first word photograph is usually pronounced with the stress on the first syllable , which you can 
3:26-
see underlined in this light here . However , if you move onto the next word photography , which derives from the first word , you will see that the 
3:38-
stress has treat from the first syllable to the second as underlined here . Now , at this point , I would want to emphasise two things . Firstly , 
3:49-
there is no simple rule regarding the use of stress in English communication , for instance , of words . Stress might change depending upon the structure of the sentence 
3:59-
that you are inserting that word into . Secondly , the use of correct stress in English language is not a deal breaker in terms of grammar or even in 
4:11-
terms of meaning , as I just pointed out . So please remember that even if you are getting your stress is all wrong , your English is still actually 
4:21-
making sense to most of the native speakers of that language who are willing to listen to U K . For However , having said this , I would definitely 
4:31-
encourage you to be more attention to this aspect of the language as it generally improves the quality of your English verbal communication and helps people understand you better . 
4:41-
Sadly , like many things in life , there is no easy way of doing this . But if you remain aware of this aspect of the language , and 
4:50-
if you pay attention to stress and Internation while listening to BBC radio , for instance , or any such high quality resource of English language , then you will 
5:0-
soon find the two English speech is improving in clarity . So now that we are done with our discussion of English pronunciation , let's see how the language works . 
5:14-
And in the course of this and the next few lectures are gold would be to try and understand some of the basic mechanism that underlined the functioning of the 
5:26-
English language . And once we get a grip of the underlying logic , which informs the V is in which the English language is put together , we would 
5:36-
be more confident in using it are starting point . Here is the word , and today we will see how the English word is formed and the V's in 
5:47-
which it accrues layers of meaning and nuances . Now am sure that all a few noon , what a word is we seem to understand almost instinctively water . 
6:2-
Word is when we encounter one in a language that we know right earlier . If I tell you to define what is a word or to ask you to 
6:13-
draw very rigid boundary or distinction between what is and what is not a word , you will see that the task is not quite simple . Let us take 
6:27-
a piece of writing , for instance . After all , what is writing but a piece of paper with words inscribed on it . Right now , we will 
6:36-
usually not have any difficulty in identifying well . A word begins and we're a word ends in that written piece of people Right now . The reason for such 
6:49-
confidence is that when you look at the wrecking PGE , you will see that there are strings of letters which are divided , which are separated by blank spaces 
7:1-
before and after them . So we assume that each cluster of letters that stand isolated like an island on the page , surrounded by blank spaces the represent individual 
7:14-
words . Yet such an understanding of a word has at least two problems . One is that such need separation of words by blank spaces lose me Ling . 
7:28-
The movement will shift from the written text to verbal communication . Take , for example , these written words . Do you want two come with May ? As 
7:47-
you can see , there are seven words here , and in its written form , each word is clearly separated from the other by space . Now try and 
7:58-
read out these words , as if you were asking this as a question casually to a friend . And you will see that if you try to do that , 
8:8-
you end up speaking something like do on a calm with me . This means that it's verbalised forms the blank spaces that we see separating words in a written 
8:23-
text . They are often not replaced by equivalent pauses . In fact , if you try and inserted pause in a place where is a blank space , you 
8:38-
will see that your language spoken language , at least , is becoming very mechanical . In fact , this is precisely the problem that we notice when we have 
8:50-
a computerised voice reading out a text to us , isn't it because each blanks piece is turned by that voice into a pause , thereby resulting in an artificial 
9:4-
rendition of the text . However , the point is that even when we speak naturally and do not insert such artificial poses , a competent listener who is familiar 
9:15-
with the language does not have any problem identifying the separate words in our speak . For instance , if I say something like , Can I have a glass 
9:24-
of water ? I did not use any polls , and the it If I ask you to count how many words I just uttered , you will have no 
9:33-
problem in counting and finding that uttered seven words . Therefore spaces separating clusters of letter . They are not very accurate . We of understanding how a word works 
9:51-
now coming to the second problem , which an autograph IQ understanding of the word results in . And of course , by oughta graphic . I mean the written 
10:0-
word . Look at this sentence . For instance , I have been invited by my girlfriend's family for a lunch in a restaurant , which is a short walk 
10:11-
from my apartment building on the 31st Street . Now focus on the cluster of letters I have with which the sentence begins on paper , the form and isolated 
10:24-
unit separated by space . But is it one word , or is it too ? Next , come to this other cluster of letters ? 31st ? Do we 
10:37-
count the hyphen as equal to a blank space and read the cluster of letters as towards or do we read the whole thing as the same word ? Then 
10:46-
again , is a whole of girlfriends a single word ? Or is the word simply girlfriend or even girl and friend And the apostrophe followed by the S is 
10:57-
something else that is not part of the words . Now , at this point , some of you might argue that I am unnecessarily complicating matters here . A 
11:6-
world is anything that convenes a concept or has a particular meaning . And therefore we need not look at people to understand how a word operates of what is 
11:17-
a word . We do not need to have an autograph IQ , understanding of word . A tall . We can simply map it on to the notion of 
11:27-
meanings and concepts and Walla we know what the word is . But here again we will encounter some major problems in confusion . Let us go back for a 
11:36-
moment to a sentence that we were discussing . Just now look at the two clusters of letters that are there . One cluster is pronounces apartment . The other 
11:46-
is buildings now oughta Graphically , they are two distinct words , but and the conceptual level they signify a unified idea of a building that is separated into a 
11:59-
number of apartments . We are still talking about a single building , a single concept . So does this make apartment building one word or two because it conveys 
12:11-
a single concept , a single entity ? So now that we have become familiar with the problems that plague our common sense understanding of the term word here is 
12:22-
what I proposed . Rather than looking at words as the meaningful unit that make up a language , I suggest that we try and understand the meaning , making 
12:32-
process through the concept of more feels . Now this is a new term for most of you . So let me define this term . What is a more 
12:44-
FEMA , and how does it differ from a word , or how does it to relate to a word ? To understand this , let us take the cluster 
12:52-
of letters W R . Or right now , in our common sense , understanding this is a word , and it has a very specific meaning . So , 
13:6-
for instance , if we consult Oxford English Dictionary , this is the meaning that we get , and I'll read it out to form letters , symbols , words , 
13:15-
etc . By carving in grieving or incision to trace in or on a hard or plastic surface , especially with a sharp instrument to record in this week . 
13:28-
This is the meaning that auctioning leadership gives of the word right now , if I add the two letters are and at the beginning of the word right , 
13:43-
we get another meaning , which adds and wants to the original word right . And Oxford English Dictionary defines this new word , which is ri right ? As 
13:54-
to write again , especially in a different form now , I am sure whatever your common understanding of a word is , the letters R E will not be 
14:7-
considered by you as and individual word Yet . Interestingly , these two letters , taken together , has a stable meaning in English language . It conveys a sense 
14:21-
of repetition of a particular action . Take the word re announce , for instance , the letters re R E signifies are repeat announcement . Similarly , you have 
14:35-
words like redistribute , renew , recharge , reinstate , reorganise , reconstitute . It's now this letter cluster re Ari in English language is an example of more films 
14:51-
coming back to the initial question . What is a morphine ? Morphine is the smallest meaningful unit of language . I repeat more theme is the smallest , many 
15:6-
full unit of a language here . Some of you might think that we are back to the tricky issue of mapping a unit of a language to a particular 
15:18-
meaning or a concept . And we already saw when discussing this in our attempt to find out what a word is that this can be a really tricky issue 
15:28-
now , in order to answer this doubt if you have it , let us elaborate things a little here . When I talk about more feelings , I am 
15:39-
not just saying that they are meaningful units . What I am saying and this is important is that they are the smallest meaningful unit , which means that more 
15:53-
feels cannot be further divided . If you try and divide them up in any which way , they would cease to be meaningful units at all in a particular 
16:4-
language . An example will make this clear . Think of the cluster of letters that is pronounced as girlfriend . Now , if I ask you whether it's a 
16:13-
single word or not , you will immediately realise that I am pushing you towards the same confusion that we had discussed earlier . Oughta graphically , it's a single 
16:26-
word conceptually to it refers to one single entity yet to . We also know that the word is constituted of two other commonly known words , namely girl and 
16:38-
friend . So the arms to the questions whether girlfriend is a single word or not is confusing , because the term word is rather feed ge as a form 
16:51-
of categorisation . However , we are on much firmer grounds when we talk about morph Eames . So if we re freeze the question as to whether girlfriend is 
17:1-
a single morphine on , not the answer will always be no without any doubt . Why ? Because girlfriend can be further broken up into two other meaningful units . 
17:15-
Girl and friends , which means it does not represent the smallest meaningful unit in English . On the other hand , both the girl and friend are examples of 
17:30-
morph Eames . Why again ? Because they cannot be any more divided into smaller , meaningful units . So , as I said , a morph , Eames is 
17:39-
the smallest meaningful unit in a language . Girl or friend is a more film because you try and divide these letters up and you will not be able to 
17:52-
arrive at any smaller , meaningful unit within the para middle of English language . So now that we know water more shihm is we're going to be much more 
18:4-
confident in our attempt to understand how a language like English is put together . Well , here . I would like to make it clear that though I presented 
18:14-
the term word as problematic and as fuzzy , I am not suggesting that you stop using the term altogether are common sense . Understanding of the term word is 
18:25-
absolutely fine . Most of the time it serves us fantastically well most of the time until landless , we start thinking about certain complicated cases that I just mentioned . 
18:36-
So for casual conversation we can , and we still would like to retain the use of that term . In fact , I myself will continue using the term 
18:47-
word throughout this course . But having said that , we also need to bear in mind from now on the distinction between a word and a morphine and also 
18:58-
note that the first is a rather fuzzy category , a youthful but Fozzie category . And it is the second , which offers us a deeper insight into the 
19:8-
way language functions . Now to continue with our discussion of more films , when I cede the letter cluster reek are is a more team and girl is a 
19:25-
more seem to you must have noticed that there is a difference between the two house who , well , the second morphine that his girl can stand alone and 
19:36-
is used in English language even in its isolated form . Where is the first more fame's that is ? Ri cannot be used on its own in English language 
19:49-
and must be attached to some other component . So we have actually too broad categories of morphine . One is called free , more themes , and the other 
20:2-
is called Bound . More films free . More themes are more films that can stand alone and bound . More feels are more films that need to be fixed 
20:15-
with something else in order to be used in order to form part of language use . Now , the most common form in which we find bound morph Eames 
20:27-
operating in English language is in the form of affixes . But then , what are a fixes ? Well , affixes are basically bound morph eames , which are 
20:37-
added to a core meaningful element of a word , which is called base , for instance , look at the word undo here , the core meaningful element . 
20:50-
The central , meaningful element is signified by the letters do do , whereas the more seem on is attached to it . So in this particular case on is 
21:3-
the affects , whereas do is the base . We will not take up each of these two things the affects and the base separately and try to unpack the 
21:16-
way they function . To start with a fix isthe in English language . There are mainly two types of affixes , the prefix and the suffix . What is 
21:28-
the prefix prefixes ? A morphine which proceeds of BCE that is it attaches itself in front of the base on is therefore a prefix in English because it attaches 
21:42-
itself at the beginning of basis , for example , we find this prefix in words like undo unnecessary , unpardonable unrest unfulfilled etcetera . Similarly , re is a 
21:56-
bound more theme that fixes itself at the beginning of bases in English language and therefore again acts as a prefix . So we have words like rewrite , redo , 
22:7-
reorganised , reconsidered , removal , etcetera . On the other hand bound morph Eames , likely l y or ink in GE or ist ist or even apostrophe s 
22:23-
for that matter . Occur asked to the basis and are therefore referred to as suffixes . Here , examples will include words like friendly lively , working , running , 
22:36-
type assed pianist girlfriends with an apostrophe years . Boyfriends with an apostrophe years shy owns with an apostrophe s so on and so forth . Now here we need 
22:48-
to motor few important things . Firstly , the rules of affixes are predetermined within a language that is to say which affects would attach to which part of the 
23:1-
base is already determined by grammatical laws and cannot be changed by individual language uses . Thus , if you want to use the ethics un or pre or Trump's , 
23:16-
or re or eat these kind of f ixis in English language , you will see that will have to use them necessarily compulsorily as prefixes . Debut cannot attach 
23:31-
them to any other part of the base . Thus it will have to be international , and it cannot to be national enter because there is a grammatical rules 
23:44-
prohibiting the latter use . Similarly , it will have to be unforgiving , and it cannot be forgiving or forgive un something like that . Also note that just 
24:2-
because the same set of letters resembling popular affixes are present in word does not automatically mean that they function as affixes everywhere . For example , take these two 
24:18-
words singer and finger . Now both of these words ends in our yet in the first word . Senior are is actually a suffix that is attached to the 
24:35-
base , saying in the second word . However , E . R is not a suffix . Indeed , figure is a single more shihm , and it cannot 
24:47-
be broken down into f'ing and purr . There is another interesting thing about the fix is that you should . I mentioned that as far as English language is 
24:59-
concerned , there are primarily two kinds of fixes . A prefix and a suffix . Now there are other kinds of affixes to available in other languages , which 
25:10-
are either not operative in English language or are very rarely used . Take the example of In fix . For instance , What are in fixes in fixes are 
25:21-
basically fixes inserted within other more teams . Informal English . We do not find the use of in fixes , but in certain cases of informal American English , 
25:34-
we sometimes fine speakers inserting cuss words within a morphine , as in fixes . One example that comes to my mind here is the use of the word abso 
25:48-
bloody lutely , right ? But as you can see , such usage is very rare in English language and is completely absent from within any formal context of conversation . 
26:3-
Now , what I have discussed about affixes so far relate to the rules of the positioning . I will now therefore trying talk something about how the functions and 
26:15-
as far as the functionality of affixes our concern again , we see that they can be divided into two broad categories . The first category is called the Reveille . 
26:28-
Chinna ll more films and the second category is called inflexion and more films . Now , though , these words might sound technical and therefore difficult . They are 
26:41-
actually not really difficult and you'll see when I explain it to you . So let me explain with a few examples here , Think of a word like do 
26:53-
the If you add and fix like un to create a word like undo or an affects like read to create a word like we do or and affix like 
27:7-
to create a word like door , you are actually adding important advances to the meaning of the original words the movement to add any of this affixes . So 
27:20-
when you add the prefix on and arrive at the world , undo it's meaning will be very different from the base . Do with which you're originally started . 
27:32-
Not only that , it's many will also be very different from the other word redo that we have arrived at by adding the prefix re to the base . 
27:43-
Do and similarly both undo and redo would signify meanings that are very different from the meaning of the word dur which you arrive at by adding the suffix are 
27:55-
to the base . Do , on the other hand , imagine adding the suffixes Yes , for I n g to the same base . Do you will see 
28:11-
that the meaning is actually not majorly altered because a word do does and doing all of them basically refer to the same action . This difference is the key 
28:29-
to our understanding if attached and affects , which adds a new nuance to the meaning of the B s . Then that affects is called derivation a ll more 
28:43-
film and the word resulting from the addition of deprivation . A ll morphine is called a derived word . However , when and affects does not change substantially the 
28:59-
meaning of the B s , but nearly has a grammatical function of indicating things like tense like number like person , etc . Then it is called inflexion a 
29:13-
ll morphine . So take the word sleep . If I have a sentence like I sleep every night then the world sleep appears without any affixes Right now look 
29:24-
at this . If it is a subject of the sentence and instead of I I replace it with the word she . Then immediately you will see that will 
29:36-
have to add the suffix s to the verb sleep as an inflexion a ll more fame wife not to make any change in the meaning of the word , 
29:47-
but merely for grammatical reasons . Thus , the suffix s that I add to the world Sleep would indicate that the subject of sleep which is here acting as 
30:0-
a verb in the sentence , is actually third person singular . Similarly , if I have a sentence like you walk every day , then the world walk is 
30:13-
without any affixes . But let us I tweaked the sentence into something like you walked yesterday . The suffix does not add any major change in meaning to the 
30:28-
base word walk , but merely fulfils the grammatical function of indicating tense . In both the sentences , action remains the same . But in the first sentence , 
30:41-
the action is something that is regularly happening and in the second sentence Thanks to the addition of the inflexion will morph team , we know that the action started 
30:53-
and ended sometimes in the past Please don't get confused here about one thing . Just because I have given you examples of inflexion all more films by referring to 
31:4-
verbs . Do not assume that birds are the only kinds of words that can take inflexion more things Look at the world girl in the sentence . The girl 
31:16-
is very quiet here The world girl is announced Right now we can add the suffix to make it into a sentence Like the girls are very quiet In the 
31:33-
second sentence , the affix again does not substantially change the meaning of the base word girl , but simply provides the grammatical function of indicating plural number two In 
31:45-
the first case , it was sealed in the second case with the addition of the suffix Yes , we know that the number has changed from singular to plural . 
31:54-
It is performing a grammatical function also look at the word friends where I have added the suffix apostrophe s to the base friend Here again the suffix acts as 
32:9-
an inflexion will morph Eem performing the grammatical function of indicating possessions . So I hope that the distinction between divisional more shihm and inflexion morphine is now clear to 
32:21-
you . Next , let us come to the element that have been referring to as base , as I mentioned earlier bases , a core meaningful element within a 
32:31-
word to which and affects is attacked . Now the B s can be a free morph . Eem Example of this would include words like undo inter caste refill , 
32:44-
walking friendly girl if etcetera . If you see the basis in these words and I will be indicating them by underlining them in the slide that you have here , 
32:59-
he will see that all of them are free . More films now basis can also be formed by bound more films differences English would receive . And here , 
33:11-
actually the Ethics Ri is attached to the base Seve C E Z E , which is a bound more field because it cannot be used in isolation within the 
33:24-
English language . Now you might hurries an objection here . You might say that if more females a smallest meaningful unit within a language , how can something like 
33:36-
Seve be called a movie because it does not have any meaning in English language . Who will ? I would agree with you there partly , but this happens . 
33:50-
I mean , Seve operates as a separate morphine bound more from within English language , primarily because of a peculiarities and that pick your reality . Is all of 
34:2-
these cases of bound more things ? In fact , most of these cases I should not say all of these cases . Most of these cases of bound more 
34:10-
fields are found in English language in words that are off Latin origin . And to a Latin speaker , Seve Seve V is actually a meaningful unit . It 
34:28-
is just that within English language that meaning is not operative , though this bound morphine is plentifully used , including , in words like conceive , deceive , perceive . 
34:40-
Another example of a bound morphine acting as a base can be found in words like permit , admit , submit , etcetera . Here again , the base mitt 
34:55-
mitt would be perfectly meaningful to a Latin speaker . But that meaning is in operative in English , so met two acts as a bound more feel , just 
35:9-
like Seve . Now , in all the examples that have just quoted to explain the concept of base , I have used only one more feel acting as the 
35:22-
base , but that need not be the case . Look at the word unhelpful . Forrester's here the prefixes attached to the base helpful , which contains two more 
35:35-
films . One is a root word help , and the other is the suffix full F u l , which is attached to it so the base can contain 
35:46-
a root word that is attached with any number of affixes . Take another example . Think the word unbiased leak . The prefix on here is added to the 
35:59-
base which contains a root word . The root word is bias and then that root word has to suffixes attached to it . The first suffix is Ed Ed 
36:12-
and the second suffixes Li l Y . Now let us try to do this Exercise is likely different . We let a steak the word . Sure , it 
36:21-
is a single morph eem that can stand alone . In other words , it is a free more female . We can use this as base and add a 
36:32-
prefix like un , for instance to arrive at the world unsure . And then we can make this whole word into a new base and add the suffix Li 
36:46-
l wise to arrive at the word unsure Lee . There is take another example . We begin with the root word scribe with an ad . The prefix we 
36:57-
have been dealing with suffixes letting if you an example with graphics . Take the base word scribe now and a prefix like in in to this base word . 
37:9-
And you're I where a new word inscribed to this You can add yet another prefix so you can use this whole new word inscribed as a new base and 
37:21-
you can use prefix like our before it , so it becomes re inscribed here . The route is scribe and you have to prefixes attached to that route . 
37:34-
So as you can see here , a number of such permutations and combinations are possible . And if you now look at any complex English word carefully , you 
37:45-
will see that you can easily divide it up as a structure of morph Eames attached together . Studying this morphological composition of a word will give you a much 
37:58-
better understanding about how word is put together and how the sense of meaning is built into it layer by layer by adding various fixes . Now I know that 
38:14-
I have already introduced the number of new concepts in today's lecture and things might have started jumbling up in your mind . Therefore , letters do a quick recapitulation 
38:25-
of everything that I've sealed , which will help you Uncluttered your mind again . So first we started with word . But then we saw that it is a 
38:37-
legally defined category . We found that to understand words better , we have to dig a bit deeper and study what are called morph Eames . More films are 
38:48-
the smallest meaningful unit of a language . And here I need to remind you that just like four names morph Eames to our language specific . Now , more 
38:59-
teams are fundamentally of two types . As I said , free more films and bound morph Eames free . More films can stand alone , whereas mount more films 
39:9-
are those that need to be attached to other units in order to be used bound Morph eames , which are attached to basis , are called fixes and they 
39:20-
can be categorised depending upon their location . Visa vi the base , so if placed before the base , it is called a prefix . If placed after the 
39:30-
base , it is called a suffix . We then discussed how , depending on their functions , affixes can be categorised into two parts there evasion A ll Morph 
39:39-
Eames and instructional more films The Relational . More teams are basically fixes , which adds of central new months is of meaning to the base word , whereas inflexion 
39:51-
all more teams are affixes , which does not change the meaning of the base in any significant way , but simply functions grammatically to indicate things like tens , 
40:1-
number , person , etcetera . Finally , we discussed the basis and how they can be constituted off standalone root words or a combination of for root word and 
40:14-
a variety of affixes . So I hope now , with this summary , things are more clearly organising ahead . A college going person would typically know between 40,000 
40:26-
and 60,000 words of English if he or she has studied that language well . This is a vast number of words , and actually new words keep getting added 
40:40-
to our repository were irregularly . And this happens not only because we keep learning new words that had already existed , but we did not know , but also 
40:51-
because newly minted words get regularly added to the English dictionary words which actually did not exist or we're not in currency before . One such word that has got 
41:8-
very newly added in the English Dictionary for instance , is the word unfriend . This of herb unfriend You , you unfriend me , etcetera came into existence around 
41:20-
the early 20th century when social networking sites like Facebook , for instance , gradually started gaining popularity . The Oxford English Dictionary defines the word as the act of 
41:32-
removing a person from the list of friends or contacts on a social networking site . Now , as this definition makes clear , this word could not have been 
41:46-
in circulation in the way it now is before the advent of Internet or before the advent of social networking sites . And , in fact , Oxford English Dictionary 
41:59-
records the first example of the use of this word in this particular sense only in 2003 another example of such a new word entering the English dictionary would be 
42:13-
the construction . Now , this is a word that the French philosopher rag Farida coined newly to describe a theory of critical analysis that he came up with in 
42:28-
the 19 sixties . Now this vast area of words , which keeps expanding with time and contributing to the richness of the vocabulary of a language , are referred 
42:40-
to as content words . In their book , titled An Introduction to Language , Victoria from Qin , Robert Rodman and Nina hands defined content words as and I 
42:54-
quote now NZ verbs , a directives and adverbs that denote concepts such as objects , actions , attributes and ideas that we can think about like Children , anarchism , 
43:11-
sore and purpose content . Words are sometimes called the open class words because we can and regularly do . Add new words to these classes , such as Bollywood 
43:27-
Blonde This and 24 slash seven pronounced 24 7 . These are the words , which also readily opened themselves up to modification through . The use of affects is , 
43:45-
in fact , if you move the rule of using affixes , you can really be very creative with these content words . Take the word Bollywood , for instance . 
43:55-
I can add the suffix ish S h the be sward Bollywood and arrive at new word Bollywood ish , Bollywood ish performance , a Bollywood ish dance . And 
44:12-
the interesting part is , I will not even have to cheque the dictionary to find out whether such a word like Bollywood ish actually exists formally or not , 
44:24-
because if my listener news English and understands how affixes work within this language , she will have no problem figuring out what I am saying , just like right 
44:35-
now , you must not have had any problems figuring out what I meant when I said something like it was a Bollywood , this performance right ? But content 
44:46-
words are not the only category of words within a language or with an English language . For that matter . Apart from content words , there also exists another 
44:55-
class of words , which are referred to as function World's . Fromkin and her colleagues defined these as and I quote words which do not have clear lexical meanings 
45:10-
or obvious concepts associated with them , including conjunctions such as and or and but propositions such as in and of articles the and E and and pronounce such as 
45:28-
it . These kinds of words are called function words because they specify grammatical relations and have little or no automatic content . For example , the articles indicate weather 
45:40-
a noun is definite or indefinite doughboy or er , boy , the proposition of indicates possession as in Dubuque of views . But this word indicates many other kinds 
45:54-
of relations to the it in It's Raining and the archbishop found it advisable are further examples of words whose function is purely grammatical . They are required by the 
46:11-
rules of syntax , and we can hardly do without . Now . Unlike content words , new function words are almost never added in the repertoire of a language . 
46:26-
Neither can you easily modify them by adding fixes . They exist as free more films , and they do not readily offer themselves to any kind of combination . 
46:39-
Now , I am sure , as far as India vocabulary is concerned , all if you know the function words , or at least most of them here . 
46:47-
We must , however , admit that there usage the usage of function . Words can sometimes be tricky , and we will work upon that during the course of 
46:56-
our lectures . But what is important is when someone advises you to expand your vocabulary . They usually do not refer to function minutes because you know the function 
47:8-
words of any language that you are even barely familiar with . What expanding your book ability usually means is expanding your stock of content words and what I advise 
47:23-
you to do is work on expanding your content words , but work on it smartly . So whenever you hear a new content word or read a new content 
47:33-
word , make note of it , but also try and figure out the ways in which that content word can be modified by adding to it . Other morph 
47:46-
Eames , which gives it Numancia of Meanings . Other derivation of more films . This will make you more flexible with you use of language and also this will 
47:56-
make your language richer . Now , talking about the richness of languages for Kabila re I think I should introduce you to the concept of it . Um ology , 
48:9-
which opens up a very interesting dimension as far as the meaning of words are concerned . Etymology is basically the study of the origins of words and how individual 
48:21-
world's developed through the course of time . Take any word that you want . If you look into its etymology , will more often than not find a fascinating 
48:33-
history associated with the context in which the word originated and how it developed into its modern form . In my previous lecture , I have already given you an 
48:43-
example of a fascinating Entomology which I mentioned with regard to the word shampoo , and you'll remember it from our discussion of Sheikh Deen Mohammad . Now , as 
48:55-
you know , by now , the modern English word shampoo originally derives from the Hindustan you word champion . This information tells us an interesting storey about the British 
49:6-
colonial history of India . We have long been accustomed to reading that colonial past as characterised by the imposition of the British culture on us . However , tracing 
49:22-
the Entomology of words like shampoo , for instance , reveals that the cultural influence during the colonial period was a two way traffic . It was not nearly the 
49:33-
British colonisers who changed us culturally . We changed them as with . And another word , for instance , that proves influence of Indian culture . On the British 
49:47-
is the word Mouly attorneys soup . Now Mullah Karan is a spicy kind of a soup , and I remember having it for the first time when I was 
49:56-
in Britain . Thus , in my mind it is almost always associated with British cuisine . However , if you look up the Entomology of this word , you 
50:6-
refined an interesting fact , which is that the soup , which the English have been enjoying since the late 18th century , is actually at least . The name 
50:17-
of the soup is actually a modified version of the Tamil words mill . Abu and Malaga means paper , and Danny means water . So if such history interest 
50:31-
sue , I would strongly recommend that you have access to a dictionary like offered English dictionary , which gives elaborate Entomology of words . And if you study these 
50:43-
entomological references , it will not only make your English vocabulary richer , it will also often surprise you with nuggets of interesting historical information that would force you to 
50:56-
rethink about the past . Apart from a good dictionary , I would also recommend the reading of Amitav Ghosh is novels . Most of his novels are very re 
51:9-
see an entertaining , so you should be able to read them easily . But what is more important is that many of them will give you fascinating Entomology of 
51:20-
various words and show how these Entomology is hide behind them equally fascinating histories of human interaction and cultural networks . In fact , Entomology is at the very core 
51:32-
of his most recent novel , Gun Island , which was published in 2019 . And that novel , UN folds like a mystery storey where the protagonist embarks on 
51:42-
an enchanting journey connecting India and Italy of modern as well as mediaeval times . As he tries to trace the Entomology of the word ban . Duke , rich 
51:56-
in various Indian languages , means gun . I would not like to say anything more than this about the novel because revealing the Entomology will reveal the entire mystery 
52:9-
and therefore destroy your reading experience . But if you are interested in the historical origin and development of words , I would definitely urge you to read the novels 
52:18-
of Amitav Ghosh in general and Gang Island in particular . Finally , I would like to end today's lecture by giving you a few practical tips on the spelling 
52:30-
of certain English words . As he would already know from your experience . There is a great deal of disparity between how English words are written and how they 
52:40-
are pronounced , and we already discussed in our previous lecture that there are a number of reasons as too wide . His disparity is there at all . The 
52:50-
only sure way of learning how to spell correctly is actually through a conscious attempt carried over a very long period of time to familiarise yourself with how English words 
53:3-
are written . So the advisers read a lot of English texts and read it consciously so that you're registered the spellings in your mind . But of course , 
53:17-
such a task is easier said than done . We all know that , and in any case itself , time consuming process and will have to go through it . 
53:26-
That is how you learn the spellings of words . But today I would like to help you on your way by sharing a few name Ah nickel devices . 
53:38-
As far as English spellings are concerned , However , before I do that , I would like to stress that these are rules of come , which means , 
53:46-
though they would serve you effectively . Most of the time they are not infallible . So if you are applying these rules , remember that there will be exceptions 
53:58-
to these rules as well . So , having given you that warning , let us focus on a couple of such rules . Now , one of the difficulties 
54:9-
that people often face while writing English words is when the letters I and E are used side by side . Sometimes in some words , you find the letters 
54:24-
I in that order , and sometimes the order gets changed and you have e I . And there is very little help that you can get from the pronunciation 
54:38-
of those particular words to tell you in which order you should write . He I or now that is one of your problems . Then I can help you 
54:50-
with a rhyme that I learned while I was in school . I don't whether you know of it , but probably some a few do probably some a few 
54:57-
noon . The rhyme is right . I before e except after C or when sounded like as in neighbour and way . So this rhyme is basically a rule , 
55:15-
right ? And now if you apply this rule he will see things become easier . So when would you put I before e well in words like achieve , 
55:26-
for instance belief believe brief cashier friend Look at all of these words . I is written first and e later Because the preceding letter is not see neither does 
55:42-
any of these words pronounce include the speech sound a like in neighbour and so achieve belief believe brief cashier friends All of them puts the letters in that order 
55:58-
I first and e following that the order gets received in words like ceiling Why ? Because that cluster is following the letter c c e l i n g 
56:14-
ceiling conceive similarly see UNC then e receive DC then e receive received so on and so forth . However , as I say that these rules have exceptions and 
56:28-
as you can see the exceptions will include words like cafe kn foreigner , either weird protein , so on and so forth . Now just another interesting rules for 
56:42-
today , which pertains to words . English words ending in E for most words , ending in an E . The final is dropped when the word is joined 
56:53-
to a suffix , beginning with a vowel such as being in Abel's or al air . The finally , however , is retained when a suffix beginning with a 
57:3-
consonant such as meant less Lee or full is joined to such a word and year . Examples of final E being dropped would include the word believing . So 
57:15-
when you convert believe into believing by adding the suffix , the final e of the word believe is dropped . Similarly , care . Caring hope , hoping save 
57:27-
sieving . However , the final is retained when you convert the word , arrange into arrangement by adding the suffix meant immunity . Similarly , Base retains its final 
57:42-
E when it's converted to baseless require retains the final even is converted to requirement . Folk hopeless . Same thing happens again . Here . There are exceptions like , 
57:55-
for instance , these words acknowledge acknowledgement . The e of acknowledged . The final e of acknowledge is dropped when you add the suffix meant However , the rules 
58:7-
said something different , right ? So you can look at all of these exceptions that I have noted down here . And you will know why that rule that 
58:16-
I just mentioned is not infallible . Every time . So 9/9 argue argued , meant Tru Truly judge , judgement hold holy etc . So we will conclude our 
58:28-
lecture here today , but I will keep sharing with you more of such interesting spelling tips in our future lectures as well . Thank you for listening . 