
0:11-
welcome back to another lecture in this series on English language communication . The last lecture might have been a bit heavy for some , a few in terms of 
0:21-
the new ideas that were being introduced there . However , I am sure that a couple of listing must have sorted out the difficulties for you to Navia . 
0:30-
Gotta shift our attention from the morphological study of words and look at words from a grammatical perspective . And we are going to see how all the words that 
0:40-
we use when communicating can be categorised into various grammatical word classes or what you might have learned in your school as parts of speech . So today's lecture is 
0:56-
partly going to be a revision of some of the things that you might already be familiar with from your school days . But we will try to add some 
1:5-
useful advances to these noon items so that they become effective tools of your communication rather than being simply boring grammar lessons , which needs to be learned in class , 
1:19-
regurgitated in the exam hall and then for gotten as so many irrelevant pieces of information . But before we set ourselves to this task , let us look back 
1:32-
at some of the things we discussed in our previous lecture so that we can build upon them a little . One of the key things that we discussed in 
1:40-
our previous lecture was more feels , which we defined as the smallest meaningful unit of a language . We also discussed how there are two varieties of more seems 
1:54-
bound and free right now . Free more films . What are they ? They are those more fields which can be used in their isolated form in a language , 
2:7-
whereas bound more films are those which need to be attached to some other component in order to be used in communication . Now , in the previous lecture , 
2:18-
we have seen how in English language bound , more films are combined with free more feelings in a number of different ways . The most common form at here 
2:28-
is that we have a base which is a free morphine and then bound . More frames are attached to it , either as prefixes or as suffixes . This 
2:41-
is the most common format that we encountered . Of course , we also encountered other formats like having a bound morphine as a base like in the world received 
2:53-
that we discussed , but the most common format was having a base , which is of a free morphine . And then we have bound more films acting as 
3:6-
prefixes or suffixes to that . So in words like relocate or unfit or predator mint , we have examples of abound morph EEM , attached as a prefix to 
3:20-
a free more FIM , which acts as a base . On the other hand , in words like usable or like or apples , we have examples of bound 
3:31-
more films acting as suffixes to free morphine basis . We have also talked about how a single free , more free MME . Route can have a number of 
3:43-
bound more films attached to its simultaneously as prefixes and suffixes . Just Paris is the word un inscribed has a two bound more films attached to the free Morphey 
3:56-
um route scribe as prefixes and one bound Morphey MME . Attached to the route as a suffix . Similarly , in the word undeniably , we find the root 
4:11-
word it in I attacked 23 bound morph Eames , out of which one is acting as a prefix and two are acting as suffixes . Apart from this , 
4:23-
we have also seen that in the English language bound more films , can Philly occasionally act as routes , as I told you in words like received , deceive , 
4:32-
conceive , permit , admit , etcetera , etcetera . However , what we have not discussed is a possibility of 23 more films coming together to form a word . 
4:47-
This process is called compounding to put it differently when free morph Eames come together to express a single meaningful entity , then that results in the formation of a 
5:5-
compound word . And this process forming new words through compounding is actually a very important aspect of how English workable operates . How mu words are generated within English 
5:22-
for cable . To give you an example , let us look at the world greenhouse . By now , all of you know how to look for more films 
5:30-
within a word . So if I ask you to identify the constituents more females here , he will immediately recognise that the word is constituted of two more films , 
5:40-
green and house . Now you will also recognise that neither green nor house is a bound more film . Both of them are regularly used in English language as 
5:53-
standalone words , and therefore both of them are free mawrtians when these two free more fields are brought together . As I told you , the process is called 
6:4-
compounding , and the resulting word green house gives us an example of a compound word . Now here we need to keep in mind . Two things first is 
6:16-
in the word green house . Neither of the two more females are fixes . That is to say , Green does not act as a prefix to the base 
6:26-
house . Neither does house act as a suffix to the base green . You'll remember from our earlier discussion that any kind of affects is basically a bound morphine . 
6:39-
In other words , prefixes and suffixes can only be formed through pound more fields and not through free more films . This is very important to remember , so 
6:50-
we should not look at a word like green house through the lens of affixes and , you know , trying to locate a base and then what is attached 
7:0-
to it as a prefix and what is attached to it as a suffix that would be a very wrong lends through which to interpret the formation of compound words . 
7:10-
The second thing that we need to note about compound words is that when two or more free more scenes , in fact are brought together the meaning of the 
7:20-
resultant word the resultant compound would is not simply a sum total of the meaning of all of the constituent free morphine . It signifies , in fact , a 
7:30-
different entity altogether , which may or may not have any close link with the meaning of the constituent . More films . Thus , the compound word greenhouse forest 
7:43-
is is not simply a house that is green , right . It signifies a different entity altogether , as many of us will know . Green House , in 
7:53-
fact , is a special kind of a structure that is often found in gardens . The structure is usually made of glass walls . Or at least they have 
8:3-
a lot of glass of plastic teens in their surrounding walls , which create a very special climatic condition within these structures . And these climatic conditions are created to 
8:20-
sustain the growth of certain special kinds of plants . That's why we create greenhouses in our gardens , Another example of an English compound . Word is but of 
8:32-
like , which again you can see there are two free morph Eames that combined together , too , form this compound word . The more films are , of 
8:43-
course , butter and flight now , just like Green House , but a flight to signify something that is not a sum total of the meanings of its constituent 
8:53-
mawrtians . Thus , a butterfly is not a fly made out of button private means a special kind of insect , which feeds on nectar and has two large 
9:7-
pairs of brightly coloured beings . That's what a butterfly is . Indeed , the world butterfly is an example of how far removed the meaning of the compound Word 
9:18-
can be from the meaning of its constituent . More films , I mean , the morphine fly , for instance , can do not still somehow be associated with 
9:31-
the many of the world butterfly because they are both flying insects . But the more from butter has almost no relationship with the nectar feeding insect . In fact , 
9:45-
while preparing for this lecture , I got interested in the Entomology of the world , but a flight to know how the term butter got associated with this word 
9:55-
in the first place . And what a court from Oxford English Dictionary was a rather vague set off entomological connexions surmises , really not very confirmed statements , and 
10:10-
this is what the dictionary states the motivation for the name is unclear and has been religiously explained . It may arise from the pill yellow appearance of the wings 
10:24-
of such European butterflies , perhaps specifically the brimstone butterfly , or from a supposed tendency to feed on or over over butter or buttermilk , or from a folk 
10:36-
believe that butterflies steel batter . Now , even if we believe in any of these suggested entomological derivations , then we will have to admit that whatever tenuous link 
10:52-
that Butterfly had with butter at some point in history is no longer operative in English language today . So the compound word butterfly is very different from the meanings 
11:7-
of the to free , more films that constitute it within the English language as we know it today . Now , at this point , I want to introduce 
11:16-
an autograph IQ complication in English compound words we find while writing them . There are different trees of writing compound words in English language , for instance , sometimes 
11:29-
a compound word is written as a single word separated from other words by space . Example of this would include words like green house butterfly , grapefruit notebook , 
11:42-
things like that . But in other times we find compound words to be written in a way where each constituent free morphine is treated as a separate oughta . 
11:53-
Graphic word . Examples of this would be stir fry for instance , Rest ER is written as a separate word , and Fry is written as a separate good . 
12:3-
But nevertheless they are morphological Lee , one compound word . Other examples here would include dinner table , real estate , things like that there . Is it another 
12:16-
way of writing compound words in English , where in the Constituent Free , more films are not fused together , but they are written separately , a separate words 
12:28-
and then connected by hyphens . Example of this would be a word like mother in law , for instance , where mother in law are written as separate words 
12:40-
and then they are connected by high France . Now there are other examples of such hyphenated compound words in English . Merry Go Round were again , like Mother 
12:53-
in Law . Three free . More themes are connected through hyphen . These are also good examples of three free constituent more teams coming together to form a compound 
13:5-
we're through . Do you ? Usually we find to morph Eames coming together to form compound words in English . It need not be to always there can be 
13:17-
other numbers of free more films coming together as well as we can see in the case of Mother in Law and in the case of Merry Go Round . 
13:26-
The problem here is that there is no hard and fast rule that determines how compound words are to be written in English . That is to say , I 
13:39-
cannot tell you why some compound words are written as one single word and why , in some cases the constituent free mawrtians are written separately and why , in 
13:50-
some other cases , hyphens are used to join these free more feels . These are mostly determined by conventions and such conventions . I know it's frustrating , but 
14:3-
such conventions do change over time . For instance , Oxford English Dictionary records that Green House was written with a hyphen separating rain and house in the early 18th 
14:17-
century . And it was only from the late 18th century that we find Green House being written as a single word without any hyphen or space between the two 
14:28-
more films . The case of the compound word ice cream is even more curious . If you study all the entries for the word in Oxford English Dictionary , 
14:39-
you will see that for centuries now , some authors have chosen to write it as two separate words , while others have written it with a hyphen . In 
14:47-
between ice and cream . If we move on to another word icebox , we see it being written in all the three different ways that I've just mentioned to 
14:59-
you . Namely , ice and box are sometimes written as two separate words . Icebox is awful , written as a single word , and also there are instances 
15:11-
where ice and box our return a separate words but connected with the hyphen . So you see , it is impossible for me to give you a rule here , 
15:19-
but the more you read English text , you will get familiar with the current conventions , and you will know in which way a compound word is usually written . 
15:30-
Today . However , having said that , there is no rule to all of this . I would want to tell you that there is actually an exception . 
15:39-
This exception produced to the rule of adding a hyphen In certain cases , by compound , words are used as objectives , the the extreme . This with an 
15:50-
example . Take the word middle class . Now it is a compound word , and as per convention , it is written as two separate words . The free 
16:2-
more films Middle and class , the R kept separate while writing letters Now build a sentence around this compound word , for example , Think of a sentence like 
16:14-
I belong to the middle class now . So far , there is no confusion because everything here is working as per convention . The middle class , even in 
16:26-
this sentence , appears in the form of two separate words . But if we tweak this sentence or bait , and if we come up with the sentence like 
16:37-
this one , I am part of the middle class society . Then here you can see the compound word middle class gets written with hyphen , and there is 
16:50-
a rule that dates such use of Haifa Nation to understand the rule noticed that in the sentence I am part of the middle class society . The compound word 
17:2-
middle class acts as an objective or as a qualifier to the noun society and is placed before it through . What is the rule that is being played out 
17:14-
here . While the rule is that any compound word which is conventional , written as a set of different words , needs to be connected with hyphen when being 
17:26-
used as an objective or as a qualifier in front of announced in the centre , I belong to the middle class , the constituent elements of the compound word . 
17:37-
We're not connected with hyphens because it was not acting as an objective that was placed in front of a noun . On the other hand , in the next 
17:47-
sentence , the hyphen is necessary because middle class their acts as an objective placed before announced . Let us take another example , it a start with the compound 
17:59-
word coffee tea Again . The convention is to write this compound word as two separate words . But if you have a sentence like this is a coffee table 
18:12-
book , then you can see we would need to . Haifa need the words coffee and table because it is acting as a qualifier to the non book and 
18:22-
is placed in front of it and is placed before it . The last bit is very important . The placing of this compound word as a qualifier before around 
18:33-
that location is very important . Why ? Because you only have to hyphenate a conventional Ian hyphenated compound word when you are placing it as an objective in front 
18:45-
of a noun . If it is pleased after the noun , then the hyphen is not required . So , for instance , of the sentence is something like 
18:55-
the book is meant for the coffee table . Then , of course , no need to hyphenate the compound word coffee tea . Here . I need to caution 
19:7-
you about something , which is that this rule that I just mentioned is sometimes rather loosely followed by authors who are writing informally . And a large part of 
19:20-
the texts that fills the Internet today is written by authors who are not careful enough . So do know that this rule exists and do be careful about it 
19:33-
when writing formally . And don't get confused when your Internet searches through up text that do not strictly follow this rule , or even other rules of using English 
19:46-
language , which I will be discussing in the subsequent lectures . Just remember that Internet is a wonderful source , but often it can create confusions for us , 
19:57-
so don't get confused while searching the Internet . Now that we have talked so much about the English word , I would like to end this discussion by leaving 
20:6-
you with a few thoughts on the acquisition and the use of English vocabulary . The first thing that I want you to note here is the importance of using 
20:16-
the right word , and I will need to explain here what I mean by the phrase right word . But before I do that , let me tell you 
20:27-
the source from where I derive this advice and from where ? I have derived a number of advice regarding writing , in fact , and I have tried implementing 
20:39-
them to better my communication style . I am sure you have heard about the American novelist Mark Train . In fact , abridged versions of his to humorous novel , 
20:50-
The Adventures of Tom Sawyer and Adventures of Huckleberry Finn , were in fact two of my most constant companions as a child . So if you haven't yet read 
21:2-
these novels , then I would request you to do so . We're only because they contain wonderful storeys , absolutely thrilling , but also because Mark Twain is a 
21:15-
great pro stylist , and if you read him carefully , you definitely learn a thing or two about the art of writing anyway . Twin was once asked for 
21:25-
his advice about writing , and one of the important things that he seed in his advice is that a young writer will notice in the course of time , 
21:37-
as his reading goes on that the difference between the almost right word and the right word is really a large matter . It is the difference between the lightning 
21:50-
bug and the lightning . So the point here is that , at least in writing , if not in all other forms of communication , the difference between a 
22:1-
right words and a word that is close enough but not quite right is still tremendous . It is as tremendous as the difference is between the searing luminosity of 
22:14-
a lightning that spreads across the whole sky and the tiny amount of luminescence produced by a lightning bug or a glow worm . But now the question is , 
22:25-
What do I mean by a rightward ? And how is it different from a wrong word ? Even more intriguingly , how is the right word different from what 
22:34-
have referred to after Mark Twin at an almost right word ? Well , you see , each word has a very specific Newell's of meaning , and though the 
22:47-
broad meanings of a number of words might be similar , exact meanings are never quite the same . And what twin suggests is that we grew more acquainted with 
23:1-
these exact meanings of the words that we use so that our communication becomes more precise . I will elaborate on this by giving an example from a piece written 
23:14-
by the Indian Marist and scholar Nirat See Choudhury . Choudhary is often remembered today for his controversial views on the British colonialism of India . But what concerns us 
23:28-
here is his masterly cross over the English language . Really India . Choudhary made himself sue proficient in the English language that he would often point out mistakes in 
23:41-
English pieces written by British authors . So , for instance , in one of his essays that Chaudhary Road for the Bridge magazine The Spectator in 1988 he starts 
23:54-
by pointing out how the contemporary British have grown lax with the use of their English language . And to prove his point , he reproduces a headline from a 
24:4-
recent edition of The Times newspaper , which for more than 200 years now is regarded as one of the foremost English dailies , not only in Britain but throughout 
24:18-
the world . In fact , the headline that Choudhary has a problem with is this royal few silly salutes Princess without name . The news item under this heading 
24:34-
actually dealt with the birth of a princes in the British royal family , and what the headline hoped to suggest was that the birth of the princess was a 
24:45-
happy occasion , which was celebrated by a consul . You'd now , Choudhary insists that in try to do so , the TIGHTY uses a word fuse a lead 
24:56-
in a very incorrect way , interact . Choudhary also argues that not only the title of the headline , but indeed the whole newspaper article shows a very limited 
25:7-
knowledge of English words . So , according to Choudhary , the problem that exists with the word fuselage with the use of the word fuse delayed in the title 
25:20-
is only compounded by the use of the word volley in the article to describe the same phenomenon . No , what is the problem here ? Because both future 
25:32-
leader and volley are indeed quite commonly used terms to signify discharge of gun ammunition , gun firing . But Chaudhary points out that a competent English speaker should know 
25:44-
the advances that each of these words carry . And The Times articles , along with its headline , according to Choudhary , has got the nuances of these words 
25:58-
horribly wrong . He explains this by quoting the meaning of the two words . Fuse Aly and volley from his dictionary . And I reproduce here . What Chaudhary 
26:9-
rights . Fuchsia lead is defined as a simultaneous discharge of many firearms in rapid succession of discharges , hence execution by such discharges . Volley is defined in turn , 
26:26-
as in modern Italy . Fire one round per gun in a battery fired without regard to the order of firing or the intervals of time between shorts . So , 
26:38-
as you can see here , though both usually and volley signifies a discharge of gun ammunition . They signify very different kinds of ammunition discharged than what usually happens 
26:52-
during the course of a gun salute , which is a very formal ritual that commemorates certain solemn occasions . Now , to begin with , fuchsia , lead and 
27:2-
volley are both fired with an intention to kill , and secondly , they do not convey any suggestion of a commemorative ritual . Rather , as Choudhary points out , 
27:15-
the use of these two words means the picture of a horrible scene of chaos , massacre and bloodshed , which is very far removed from the ritualistic moment of 
27:27-
celebration or commemoration that marks the gun salute or that marked the gun salute . Specifically on the occasion of the birth of the princess , which the article tries 
27:38-
to discuss indeed , to revert back to the court of Mark train , these two words are as far removed from the reality that they are trying to describe 
27:49-
as the luminosity of a lightning bag is from the searing luminosity of the lightning . The right word that Chaudhary suggests in the place of fuselage and Wally is 
28:4-
Salvo who's dictionary definition is as follows in modern artillery fire , one round per gun in a battery fired in a prescribed order and with a prescribed interval of 
28:20-
time between shots . Now , for many a few , all of these three words fuselage , volley and salvo might be unknown . And if that is the 
28:32-
case , then you can already see the need to increase you for Kabila re . But you should also appreciate the fact that merely acquiring a number of words 
28:43-
without paying attention to their precise meaning would make you commit the same kind of mistakes that the writer in the Times committed . Therefore , please do not just 
28:56-
blindly set yourself the goal of acquiring a large vocabulary full of big and exotic words . The effective itty , in fact , of you , communication depends not 
29:6-
really on how many words you possess in your vocabulary , but how conscious you are to the new Vance's of me Ling's that a particular word contains and how 
29:19-
acutely you can put those nuances to use . We will get great examples of using simple words in a number of very effective ways to make our English communication 
29:33-
richer when we discuss freezer verbs . However , right now I want to introduce you to some of the things that one of my favourite authors route about the 
29:43-
acquisition and use of VOC ability , which is very relevant as far as the point that I'm trying to make sure now I do not know how many of 
29:55-
you have her of the American novelist Stephen King . I assume many a few would because he is a rather popular novelist and he writes wonderfully engaging fiction that 
30:6-
usually have a supernatural or a fantasy bend to them . For those who might not have readies novels , you might have encountered his work in the form of 
30:18-
films because a number of his novels have been converted into very successful motion pictures . For instance , I am sure you must have heard about standing Q bricks 
30:29-
classic movie The Shining , which was , in fact , based on a novel , a psychological horror written by King bearing the same name . There are other 
30:40-
famous adaptations of Kings novel for instance here and thinking about the Tom Hanks starred The Green Mile and then also the film Shawshank Redemption , starring United di Capri 
30:51-
on Morgan Freeman . And all of these are adaptations of the writings by King . However , as much as I enjoy his novels , they are not my 
31:5-
favourite pieces of writing by King . What I enjoy reading mostly , is this very thin book that he route , which is titled On Writing and this book . 
31:18-
It is partly , um , Amoy and partly a commentary about how to become a writer , And I would absolutely recommend each one of you to get hold 
31:26-
of this extraordinarily inspiring book and read it from start to finish . It is to this book that I would like to turn now and read out to you 
31:39-
a wonderful piece of advice on the acquisition and the effective use of vocabulary . That king presence to his readers don't make any conscious effort to improve your vocabulary . 
31:54-
You will be doing that as you read , of course , but that comes later . One of the really bad things you can do to your writing is 
32:2-
to dress up the vocabulary , looking for long words , because your maybe a little ashamed of your short ones . This is like dressing up a household pet 
32:12-
in evening includes the pet is embarrassed , and the person who committed this act of premeditated acuteness should be even more embarrassed . As you can see , Kings 
32:24-
book is written in an interestingly colourful , and this is in fact , what I like most about Reading King . And though most of his advise , because 
32:36-
of the way he puts them accross might sound idiosyncratic . I have come to realise that if you follow them , they make your style less cumbersome , more 
32:49-
direct and more easily comprehensible . And we need to remember that comprehensible itty is of very core of effective communication . So the vocabulary should not be used as 
33:5-
a show of because , as King points out , that is plain and simple , embarrassing . In other words , the vocabulary that you have must be acquired 
33:16-
without any special effort through the natural course of your reading English texts . And they should become an organic part of your thought world , so that when you 
33:29-
put this for cabinetry in use , they will not appear to be stilted and artificial for King . Therefore , spontaneity is the key , both in acquiring the 
33:42-
vocabulary and in using it . As he writes . And I quote again , the basic rule of a cab . Binary is use the first word that comes 
33:51-
to your mind if it is appropriate and colourful . If you hesitate in quantity , if you will come up with another word of cost , you will . 
34:1-
There is always another word , but it probably won't be as good as your first one or as close to what you really mean . However , all this 
34:12-
talk about effortlessness and spontaneity should not lead you to think that I am asking you to be clear . Listen sloppy with your use of words . Far from 
34:21-
it , spontaneity does not mean carelessness . What I am suggesting here is that make the acquisition of new words and organic process read more . Read well and 
34:34-
you will automatically imbibe new words . So you really do not need to sit with a list of lets 100 words per week and memorise them to increase your 
34:47-
vocabulary . In fact , I thing that that is a thoroughly artificial way of going about increasing you store of words such route learnings out of context , and 
34:56-
they will not help you with improving your English communication in any significant way . What I am also suggesting is that when speaking or writing , you should not 
35:9-
worry too much about how poor or rich your store of vocabulary is right now . At present , I mean , you go on increasing the size of few 
35:20-
for cabinetry organically but at any given moment while trying to communicate . Do not feel afraid about the fact that I only have a very few words in my 
35:32-
vocabulary . English vocabulary . Because whatever the size of you vocabulary , you can use it effectively , provided you are conscious of the meanings of your words and 
35:43-
try finding out the various shades and months is that each of the world to have a new vocabulary contains . This is important because it is carelessness that creates 
35:54-
all the difference between R right word and an almost right word . Now let us move on to the discussion of the parts of speech . And as I 
36:5-
have already told you , you must be familiar with a lot of what I am going to discuss from your school days , and we will therefore , in 
36:15-
a way , be covering familiar territories Now . In a previous lecture , you remember we had talked about the distinction between content , words and function worlds . 
36:27-
Now these words have different names . The content word , for instance , is also called the open class words or even lexical words , whereas function words are 
36:39-
also known as grammar words . But whatever name we might use for them , the distinction as you'll remember is pretty straightforward . The content words did not concepts 
36:51-
such as objects , actions , attributes and ideas , whereas a function words specify grammatical relationships and have little or no semantic content . Now , within the category 
37:6-
of content words , we have four groups , namely now NZ verbs , Objectives and adverbs . And it is on these groups of words or these word classes 
37:20-
that we will be focusing today . We will take up the category of function words and the various sub classes that are there under that category after we complete 
37:34-
our discussion on content words . Now , as I keep telling you , much of this will be familiar to you . But while going over familiar grounds , 
37:45-
we will also try to remove certain confusions regarding them that have seen many people to have . So let's start with Down's what announce in schools now , NSA 
37:59-
usually defined and discussed as naming words . And those such definition of noun is usually frowned upon in more advanced books of grammar . I kind of still think 
38:16-
that they are useful enough . That definition is useful enough , and it provides a fairly correct understanding of what announce is and water now does . So again , 
38:28-
we're announce is for the purpose of this course we will retain that school definition that announced are naming words that is now NZ are words that are used to 
38:39-
name particular objects or entities . However , we need to remember that the objects or entities that now NZ name are not only material objects like persons , places 
38:52-
of things , but they can also be abstract entities , light qualities , for instance , feelings , concepts , activities , even measures . So , just like 
39:4-
shopkeeper , shop and books are words that function as now NZ in English sentence , and they , of course , referred to very concrete things . There are 
39:15-
other words like good , for instance , or happiness . Parenthood reading sentiment . Um , now these are all words that name abstract things , and even they 
39:28-
are naming words . They are also regarded as now NHS within English language . The other thing to note about now onwards is that they can be divided into 
39:39-
two categories , namely proper announce and calm unknowns . Proper . Announce who's first letters are always capitalised while writing referred to one specific person or please or thing 
39:55-
like Amita , for instance , the name of woman Darjeeling , the name of a police or Statue of Liberty . Name of a thing . All other announcer 
40:8-
common Now NHS and their first letters are not capitalist in English except in special circumstances . Like , for instance , when you are using them to open a 
40:18-
sentence , Of course , then the first letter gets capitalised . Now this distinction is very well understood , so I will not dwell too much on this distinction . 
40:30-
But there is another distinction that is used to classify , announce and other set of categories , and that needs some attention . These are the categories of countable , 
40:42-
knowns and non countable now , so all announced that we have can be divided into countable nuns and non countable knowns . Now the names of these categories might 
40:59-
seem to be pretty straightforward , and you might assume that well , accountable . Now , NHS are the names of objects that can be counted and non accountable . 
41:11-
Now , NHS name objects that cannot be committed , right ? Pretty straightforward . Now , for most of the cases , this is a good enough understanding . 
41:21-
But the problem here is what is regarded is countable , and what is regarded as non countable in English language is determined not to really very common sense , 
41:35-
but by grammatical conventions . So , for instance , furniture in English is non countable . Now , though it might technically be possible to count how many pieces 
41:49-
of furniture one is referring to . Similarly in English , gold is a non countable now , and so his luggage . So you will need to be alert 
41:59-
while learning English language , and all of us are learning English language . We adjusted different levels of proficiency . So while picking up this language , all of 
42:10-
us need to be careful that the announced that we are picking up are the accountable or are they being used as non countable ? Because that distinction will determine 
42:22-
what grammatical rules come into plea while using them and different grammatical rules , in fact coming to play depending on whether you are using a accountable now or whether 
42:34-
using a non countable now and Leslie Jeffries in her book Discovering Language is a book that we have already referred to in one of a previous lectures , gives 
42:43-
us the outline of these distinct grammatical rules accountable . Now NZ can occur in combination with numbers with the indefinite article E or an and can be plural ised 
42:59-
by the addition of the plural more team . These include cats , tables , Children , ideas and bicycles . The numbers of the other sub class , non 
43:10-
countable or mass now nd's do not occur with numbers or the indefinite article and cannot be plural ised . These include air , sugar , water , horror piece 
43:23-
and future . So what is being said here ? Well , if you are using accountable now , then three distinct grammatical features or grammatical rules come into play . 
43:38-
What are this ? The first is that these now NZ can be used along with the mention of specific numbers that revealed their exact quantities . So , for 
43:48-
instance , I can say we have three tables , two chairs and one bed . In this sentence , we can refer to specific numbers because they announced that 
44:2-
we are associating with these numbers , namely , tables , chairs and beds are all accountable nuns . The second grammatical rule that Jeffrey's refers to is that these 
44:14-
now NZ countable noun can be used with the indefinite article or and when they are being used in this singular form , for instance , I can have a 
44:25-
sentence like we have a brown cat or I saw an elephant again . I can use these indefinite articles and because announced with which I am associating them in 
44:40-
the first case , a cat and in the second case and Elephant both of them are accountable . Now NZ and the third rule mentioned by Jeffries is that 
44:51-
these countable now NZ can be expressed in plural forms by adding to them plural . More films now in English . The most common morph , Eem added to 
45:4-
convert a noun from singular to plural is s . So table becomes tables , chair becomes chairs and becomes beds . But then there are also more seems like 
45:18-
rent which are used to make plural , which are used to convert into the pluralist form words like child or brother . So you get Children and brethren . 
45:33-
Brother is also more often I think , your allies as brothers . But brethren is also one form , On the other hand , in case of the mass 
45:43-
noun or non countable now NHS . What Jeffrey's is saying is , firstly , we cannot use numbers . We cannot associate numbers with them . Secondly , we 
45:52-
cannot associate indefinite articles with them and thirdly , we cannot convert them into plural eyes forms . These rules are very important to understand because we often make mistakes 
46:6-
here . Look at these sentences . Each of them is wrong because each of them mixes up the rules of countable now NHS and uncountable knowns . So the 
46:19-
first sentence is Bangalore has a fine weather . The second sentence is I carried . The heavy luggage is upstairs . The third sentence is I bought two furniture's 
46:29-
from the store . Now each of the underline words represent uncountable now NZ and yet they have been mistakenly treated in these sentences as if they are accountable ones . 
46:41-
Take the first sentence , for instance . Here , weather is an uncountable now and here it We have introduced an indefinite article which are marked in red colour . 
46:52-
So in order to correct the sentence , what do we need to do ? Go back to rule specified by Jeffries and you will see one rule is that 
47:1-
you should not use indefinite articles with non cultivable now . So if you remove that article e from the sentence , it becomes grammatically correct . Now if we 
47:14-
moved down to the second sentence may encounter a different kind of error . Here here we have mistakenly tried to plural eyes the non countable now luggage by adding 
47:24-
and s . And this is in fact a very common mistake that we often make because we often try to plural eyes , non countable now NHS and we 
47:35-
end up saying things like , I have been given a lot of homework's or I want some informations or he brought many equip men's or she has a lot 
47:47-
of emotional baggage is so here again in the sentence I carried the heavy luggage is upstairs The way to correct it would be to simply drop the S because 
47:59-
non countable now NZ cannot be dust pluralist . If you look at the third sentence , you will see that we have committed to mistakes here . The first 
48:8-
mistake is that we have added a number to specify the non countable now on furniture . And the second mistake is of course , that we have tried plural 
48:16-
ising furniture by adding and s so this second one is the same mistake that we committed in the second sentence as well how to be corrected Well , as 
48:27-
far as the plural more team s is concerned , we can just to drop it . But in order to correct the sentence , we will also need to 
48:33-
do something about the number two . And we cannot simply drop it because though that might make the sentence grammatically correct , we will lose an important piece of 
48:44-
information that the speaker is trying to convene . So what is option then ? Well , we rephrase the sentence . Thus I bought two pieces of furniture from 
48:54-
the storey . What this does is it introduces the noun peace which is accountable , noun and therefore can be qualified by numbers as well as plural ised . 
49:6-
The number two does becomes a qualifier of the plural ised accountable now pieces and the sentence becomes grammatically correct while at the same time retaining all the information that 
49:17-
the speaker originally wanted to convey . Booking . Now , before I move on to the next word class , that is verbs . I would like to point 
49:27-
out a couple of things about this distinction between countable and non countable noun . Firstly and I have already mentioned this The reason why announce is judged as accountable 
49:42-
or why it is judged as non countable has less to do with common sense and more to do with grammatical conventions . I mean , in most of the 
49:52-
cases , common sense might work , but I can point out a number of cases . It doesn't take , for example , the apparently easy division that one 
50:1-
of my rather clever students came up with ones . And she said that well , if all now NZ referring to concrete objects come under the countable category and 
50:15-
if all now NHS referring to abstract entities come under the non countable categories , if that is basically the underlying division , well , in the first glance , 
50:27-
such an assertion might sound logical because , after all , most if not all concrete objects can be counted in one way or the other , whereas abstract things 
50:38-
like emotions , for instance , cannot be counted . But things actually don't quite act that we win the grammatical purview of the English language . There are concrete 
50:50-
things , and one might see even easily accountable concrete things that are referred to by announce , which are regarded as non countable like luggage , for instance , 
51:2-
or furniture , rice , sugar , gold . I already mentioned that on the other hand , there are abstract things which are referred to by announced that are 
51:15-
slotted as accountable . Take the noun idea , for instance . It's an abstract entity , and yet it is regarded as accountable now in English language . Similarly , 
51:27-
the noun dream again , an abstract concept and again accountable now , also now NZ . Like I would say , emotion right again , an abstract entity but 
51:42-
regarded as accountable now in English language . The second point that I want you to remember is that these rules about the use of countable and non countable now 
51:51-
NZ that I just mentioned are unfortunately not watertight . And again , I know this is somewhat frustrating because the rules can be violated in certain context , and 
52:6-
Jeffries deals with this in her book , and I would ask you to read it up if you are interested a here . I would not discuss them firstly 
52:17-
because it might make the whole thing more confusing for you , but secondly also . And this is more important , I think is because you will be doing 
52:26-
just fine even if you choose not to transgress the laws that have just communicated to you . The only thing that you need to remember is that there are 
52:41-
ways of using now NZ in certain context that do not strictly follow the grammatical regulations that have mentioned . However , even if you do not know how to 
52:55-
break those regulations in certain contexts , which are mostly informal context , you will be doing just fine . You can stick to the rules and you will be 
53:6-
absolutely correct in your grammar . It's just that you might encounter other people , apparently breaking those rules in certain cases . And the thing is that they are 
53:22-
also grammatically correct . So don't simply jumped to the conclusion that , okay , these rules have been taught to me . And I know these rules and these 
53:33-
people , they are transgressing those rules and therefore they must be dramatically wrong . There are certain context in which those rules can be tweaked . Indeed . Now 
53:43-
let us move on to the world class called verbs . In this lecture , we will just go over some very rudimentary aspects of this world class because in 
53:53-
any case we will have to revisit verbs in our future lectures where we deal with things like attempts , for instance , or subject verb agreement . So to 
54:3-
begin with , what is a verb here again , like now NZ , most of us carry from our school days are rough and ready definition of a verb , 
54:14-
and what we remember mostly is that a verb is a word that depicts some kind of an action . Right now , there is not entirely wrong , but 
54:24-
then verb as a word class does much more than simply depict actions . Look at these three sentences . For instance , Rahul bakes a cake . The cake 
54:36-
has sweetness . Rahul is happy now . In each of these three sentences , I have underlined the words . But apart from the verb in the first sentence , 
54:48-
which depicts a performance of an action , namely be king , none of the other words depict any action . Proceed . The verb in the second centres actually 
54:59-
depicts and occurrence , rather as a verb in the third sentence depicts ISTEA to be so . These examples give you an idea about the various things of herb 
55:10-
can actually signify . Thus , a more comprehensive definition of a verb would actually be that it is a word which signifies an action or an occurrence or a 
55:22-
state of being . By the way here , please note that some now NZ and verbs might look similar , but they are very different in the grammatical function . 
55:33-
Take for instance , the word swimming . Now , if you are using this word to name the activity of moving through water , then you are using it 
55:45-
as a noun as a naming word . And you are doing that in a sentence like swimming is my favourite activity right here . Swimming is a noun . 
55:57-
Why you are using it is a naming word . You're using it to name a particular activity . However , you can also use this same word to signify 
56:8-
the performance of the action , the performance of the action of moving through water . And then you are using it as votes like in the sentence . I 
56:19-
am swimming . So keep that in mind . And with this we come to the end of today's discussion . In our next lecture , we will carry on 
56:31-
with our discussion of other parts of speech , will complete our discussion on adverbs and objectives . And then we will move on to the various sub classes that 
56:42-
come under the category of function words . Thank you . 